



yr 
~ 


e 














FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


of current international events by the Research Staff 





VOL. _?. No. 35 


JUNE 26, 1936 





SOVIET RUSSIA: 1917-1936 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


A revision of the pamphlet published in December 1933, 
which provides a clear and informed analysis of the principal 
aspects of the Soviet experiment, a record of developments 
within the Soviet Union and a survey of Soviet foreign 
relations. 


World Affairs Pamphlet No. 2 


25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
oa Office at New York, 











om 42, N. Y., under the act 

& % of March 3, 1879. 
cc ‘a 
 2mS 
17 Zae =} 
aie a ¥ < 
\ Ate, a/ 
oF 14 n @/ 
“7 We Coyel ical 


Division, 


Library of Congress, 


Washineton,,-D. C. 











THE NEW SOVIET 


CONSTITUTION 





OR the first time in the history of the Soviet 

régime, the Russian public is freely discuss- 
ing a vital political issue—the adoption of a new 
constitution. This discussion is the outgrowth of 
the work of a special constitutional commission 
of 31 members, headed by Stalin, which was ap- 
pointed in February 1935. The draft constitution 
has now been published and will be the subject of 
debate until next November, when it will be sub- 
mitted to the All-Union Congress of Soviets. 

Omitting the reference to world revolution con- 
tained in the 1923 constitution, the new document 
declares that the means of production belong to 
the state. “The economic life of the U.S.S.R. is 
directed by the state’s economic plan toward in- 
creasing the general wealth. In the U.S.S.R. there 
is established the principle of socialism, ‘From 
each according to his capacity, to each according 
to his work.’”” Thus the Soviet Union has not 
adopted the Communist formula of compensation 
according to “‘need,’’ which is left for the indefi- 
nite future. Moreover, the constitution guaran- 
tees private property in “houses, household fur- 
nishings, articles of personal consumption and 
comfort, and savings accounts.” The right of 
each individual to employment, rest and educa- 
tion, freedom of religious worship as well as anti- 
religious propaganda, and freedom of speech, 
press and assembly are guaranteed. Defendants 
are entitled to legal counsel in the courts; and no 
searches may be made without warrants. 

The Soviet Union is to retain its federal basis, 
but the number of federated republics is increased 
from seven to eleven. The legislative authority 
of the Union will consist of a Supreme Council of 
two chambers, which will take the place of the 
present All-Union Congress of Soviets. Abandon- 
ing the old system of indirect elections by soviets, 
the new constitution provides that the lower 
house or Council of the Union, containing about 
600 members, shall consist of one deputy for every 





300,000 people, elected by direct and secret ballot. 
The Congress of Nationalities, or second cham- 
ber, will consist of deputies chosen by the su- 
preme councils of the 11 federated republics. It 
will have 238 members. While each body will de- 
liberate separately, they will meet jointly to elect 
the President of the Union, the Presidium of 31 
members, and the Council of Commissars, who 
direct the administration in cooperation with the 
Presidium. The Congress will serve for a four-year 
term and will meet twice annually. It may ask 
questions of the administration, which must be 
answered within three days. When the two houses 
fail to agree, new elections will be held. The 
Presidium may refer any question to popular ref- 
erendum; and a deputy may be recalled by a two- 
thirds vote of his constituency. The judges of the 
higher courts will be chosen by the Supreme 
Council, but the judges of the people’s courts will 
be directly elected for five-year terms. 


The right to vote under the new constitution is 
granted to all citizens over eighteen, regardless 
of sex, race, social origin, religious belief, previ- 
ous activities or amount of property owned. Un- 
der this provision, workers and peasants will have 
the same electoral rights, and the franchise will be 
extended to many thousands hitherto excluded. 
Although the new constitution seeks to guarantee 
individual rights and democratic representation 
in the new Soviet parliament, it will not, ap- 
parently, reduce the all-controlling position of the 
Communist party. On the contrary, it declares 
that this party remains “as the foremost associa- 
tion of toilers in their struggle for social order.” 
The new draft, however, represents one more ef- 
fort on the part of the Soviet authorities to re- 
lieve the burden imposed on the population by the 
five-year plans and to insure their loyalty in the 
event of the outbreak of war. Many Western 
observers will be skeptical of the ability of the 
Soviet leaders to reverse the practices of the past 

































twenty years and respect the personal rights of 
the individual. Nevertheless, any attempt in this 
direction can only be welcomed in a world marked 
by the rise of repressive dictatorships. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


EXTREMISTS GAIN IN BELGIUM 


On the heels of an election in which both right 
and left extremists made notable gains, Belgium 
has been faced with a serious strike situation. A 
walkout, at first spontaneous but later sponsored 
by the trade unions, began on June 3 at an Ant- 
werp dock. Encouraged by French successes, the 
movement spread rapidly until it embraced an 
estimated total of over 500,000 workers. The gov- 
ernment has taken strong measures to prevent 
disorder and to keep strikers from following the 
French example and occupying their places of 
work. Nevertheless, serious disturbances have 
occurred, particularly at Liége and Charleroi, and 
martial law has been declared in two provinces. 
As in France, negotiations for a settlement have 
been supplemented by legislative proposals de- 
signed to grant concessions to the workers, includ- 
ing the 40-hour week. 


The strike wave has been handled by the recon- 
stituted Van Zeeland cabinet, which took office 
on June 13 after a three-week ministerial crisis 
precipitated by the elections of May 24. The vot- 
ing showed a strong extremist tendency. The 
Rexist party, whose victory was received with joy 
by the German Nazis, won 21 seats in the Cham- 
ber of Deputies, representing about 11 per cent 
of the popular vote. The Rexists’ strength came 
mainly from the Walloon districts; extremist 
sentiment among the Flemings turned to the sepa- 
ratist Flemish Nationalists, who doubled their 
representation. The Communists also made im- 
pressive gains, largely at the expense of the So- 
cialists. However, the three principal parties— 
Socialists, Catholics and Liberals—which have 
been collaborating in a National Union govern- 
ment since March 1935, still retain a comfortable 
majority (156 votes out of 202), although their 
relative alignment has changed. The Catholics, 
handicapped by internal dissension and recent 
corruption scandals, lost 16 seats and, for the 
first time in 50 years, surrendered their place as 
the largest single party in Parliament. Despite 
their own election losses, the Socialists took over 
the leading position. 


The most important single fact in connection 
with the elections is the unexpected strength of 
the Rexists. This group began its independent 
existence only six months ago, after its leader, 





Page Two —— 





29-year-old Léon Degrelle, split off from the Cath- 
olic party. Degrelle, a spell-binding orator with 
few definite ideas, is known as a “little Hitler” 
and manages his party on Fascist lines. Before 
the election he threatened to follow an obstruc- 
tionist policy, but has recently stated that he 
would permit his followers to vote all “reason- 
abie”’ laws. His campaign was waged chiefly on a 
“clean government” issue, with the rest of the 
platform calling for vague social reforms and an 
authoritarian government. 


The Rexist success provides an instructive con- 
trast with the situation in France. There a work- 
ing-class united front, including both Socialists 
and Communists, has succeeded in checking re- 
actionary forces, even in the face of a desperate 
economic situation. In Belgium, Premier Paul 
Van Zeeland’s national government has brought 
the country partial prosperity, notably through 
currency devaluation and extensive public works. 
Despite these economic gains, Socialist collabora- 
tion with the conservative Catholics and Liberals 
has failed to prevent the growth of a menacing 
Fascist movement. 

HELEN FISHER 





The Coming American Fascism, by Lawrence Dennis. 
New York, Harper, 1935. $3.00 


A plea for fascism in the United States. 


Sweden: The Middle Way, by Marquis W. Childs. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1936. $2.50 
Interesting account of Sweden’s workable blending of 

capitalism and cooperation. 


Mexican Interlude, by Joseph Henry Jackson. New York, 
Macmillan, 1936. $2.50 


The account of an automobile trip to Mexico via the 
new Pan-American highway. 


The Banana Empire, by Charles D. Kepner and Jay H. 
Soothill. New York, Vanguard, 1935. $2.00 
The struggle for power of the United Fruit Company 


in the Caribbean serves as a case study in economic im- 
perialism. 


The Catholic Tradition of the Law of Nations, by John 
Eppstein. Washington, D. C., The Catholic Association 
for International Peace, 1936. $3.50 
A valuable compendium of the teaching of Catholic 

Christianity upon international morality. 


The Drama of Upper Silesia, by William John Rose. 
Brattleboro, Vermont, Stephen Daye Press, 1935. $3.50 
A comprehensive historical study of a region rich in 

natural resources, long a bone of contention between 

Germany and Poland. 


Is the Navy Ready? by F. Russell Bichowsky. New York, 
Vanguard, 1935. $3.00 


Critical study of naval effectiveness. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 35, JUNE 26, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lasiigp Busit, President; EstHER G. Ocprn, Secretary; Vera MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











