nocratic 
ld have 
s. Their 
ation in 
sciously, 


| régime } 


eral de 
y stated 
iberated 
abitants 
its fron- 
lesire to 
n North 
axation” 
10ped in 
missions 
ge may 
ition. 

produce 
=rs, does 
yveen the 
pursued 
sh in the 
eral de 
oncurred 
al Eisen- 
don can 
> against 
es, their 
cilitating 
nents of 
LIOTT 


IDS 


PERIUVVICAL ROOM aneral Libr 


GENERAL LIBRARY 


GHIV. OF Mice. University sf Mt 


MPS 53 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


POLICY BULLETIN 


FOREIGN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XXII, No. 17 


FEBRUARY 12, 1943 


PUBLIC OPINION MUST BE HEARD ON POST-WAR POLICY 


a Italian Cabinet shake-up of February 6— 
one of whose results was the appointment of 
Count Ciano, Mussolini’s son-in-law and Foreign 
Minister, to the presumably far safer post of Italian 
Ambassador to the Vatican—not only indicates pos- 
sible rifts within the ruling Fascist group, but also 
raises the question of who, in Italy, might be avail- 
able to deal with the Allies in case of Mussolini's 
political demise. Reports from Switzerland hint that 
Count Ciano hopes, with the aid of the Vatican, to 
put out feelers for peace negotiations with the Allies. 
While he and other Fascists dropped in the Cabinet 
shake-up may think that their eleventh-hour with- 
drawal entitles them to a hearing in Allied circles, 
it would seem incredible that the United Nations 
should even consider negotiations with a man who 
has been so intimately connected with the Fascist 
régime. 

WHOM COULD WE DEAL WITH IN ITALY ? 
The political situation in Italy, however, is bound 
to create for the Allies many of the problems which 
have confronted Britain and the United States in 
North Africa. Should the Allies deal with King 
Victor Emmanuel, on whose personal invitation Mus- 
solini assumed power in 1922? Or with Italian Army 
leaders who, willingly or unwillingly, accepted 
Fascist leadership? Or with the industrialists, many 
of whom welcomed some of Mussolini’s measures, 
such as the outlawing of strikes, in the hope that 
they would crush “communism,” only to discover 
eventually that their own freedom was more and 
more circumscribed by the demands of Italian war 
economy? Or will new elements, held in leash by 
Fascist police measures, come to the surface once 
Mussolini, and the Germans, have left the scene— 


| elements bent on effecting a thoroughgoing revolu- 


tion that would sweep out King, Army and_indus- 
trialists along with the Fascists? Would such new 
elements look for leadership to Italian.exiles now 


living abroad, or would they, in the years of trial 
and hardship, have found their own leaders, whose 
names are as yet unknown to us? And is it in the 
interest of the United Nations to insist on the prin- 
ciple of legitimacy so eloquently urged by the Italian 
anti-Fascist historian Ferrero, irrespective of who 
might be regarded as legitimate; or is it more im- 
portant that those who gain authority after the war 
in Europe should be substantially in accord with 
the fundamental ideas for which the United Nations 
believe they are fighting, whether or not they have 
any claim to legitimacy in the legal sense? 
EVOLUTION IN NORTH AFRICA. Events in 
North Africa have amply demonstrated both the 
importance of agreement among the Allies regard- 
ing the general lines of the policy they intend to 
pursue in countries reconquered from the Axis, and 
at the same time the difficulties raised by drawing 
up rigid blueprints in advance which might not 
make sufficient allowance for the variability and 
instability of human nature. Public criticism of the 
policy followed by the United States in North Africa, 
although sometimes irresponsible, has had the good 
effect of emphasizing the disturbing long-range im- 
plications of the Darlan-Giraud régime, and has 
helped to speed up changes: in that régime which 
may gradually bring it into closer conformity with 
the popular impression of United Nations war aims. 
Such measures as the release of 27 Communist depu- 
ties imprisoned in North Africa, the liberation of 
900 out of 5,000 political prisoners, and the partial 
relaxation of anti-Semitic and anti-Masonic restric- 
tions have elicited commendation, although by no 
means entire satisfaction, in Fighting French circles. 
It is not yet clear whether the transformation of the 
Imperial Council into a “war committee,” announced 
on February 5, with a change in General Giraud’s 
title from High Commissioner to Civil and Military 
Commander-in-Chief, will open the way to partici- 


SR A SO 


| 
| 
| 


——- Page Two —>= 


pation by de Gaullists in French North Africa. A economic system they hope will emerge from the war, 
basic divergence persists between General Giraud, It becomes more and more apparent that we need 
who believes that the weaknesses of the Third Re- _to clarify our own views on the character of the war 
public—synonymous, in his opinion, with democ- and its aftermath before we can advise others what } 
facy—were responsible for France’s military col- to do or not to do. But of equal importance is the 
lapse, and many of the Fighting French, who insist procedure by which the public opinion of the United 


‘on return to democratic principles after the war, al- Nations, once clarified, can be brought to bear op 
though they are far from being of one mind as to the their political leaders and on the government agen. 
form the post-war institutions of France should take. cies which act on their behalf. Few things seem s 

NEED FOR CLARIFYING ALLIED OPINION. essentially undemocratic in democratic countries as 
It would be impossible—it would, in fact, be un- the conduct of foreign affairs, which is seldom sub. 
fortunate—for Britain and the United States to jected to direct scrutiny by the people and remains, 
prejudge the kind of government that the French, or for the most part, in the hands of Foreign Offices 
any other people in Europe, may want once they are and State Departments which are not directly te. 
free to make a choice. The fact remains, however, sponsible—or responsive—to the public. This makes 
that by dealing with one individual or group, and it more essential than ever that the President, who in 
not with others—or with a number of them, but on the United States is the principal official concerned 
different levels of cordiality—Britain and the United with foreign policy also responsible to the people, 
States weight the balance in favor of this or that should be in a position to communicate as closely 
trend of opinion which may still be in the process and as continuously with the people as Churchill 


of crystallization. The crucial difficulty, and one that 
must be faced frankly, is that the same ambiguity 
which has appeared to mark American policy in 
North Africa also characterizes public opinion in 
Britain and the United States, as well as the views 
of the Allied governments in London. The United 
Nations are united in their struggle against Germany 


for example, is able to do through his frequent te: | 
ports to members of Parliament. Otherwise there is 

always a danger that, as happened in 1919, a divorce 
will occur between the government and the people 
on crucial issues of foreign policy. A war proclaimed 
as a war to make the world better for ‘‘the common 


: : —and so are Giraud and de Gaulle. But the United ee ao — Seen Me come | 
Ne Nations are no more clearly united than the two a | 
! 3 French Generals regarding the kind of political and VERA MICHELES DEAN 
if WHAT KIND OF RECONSTRUCTION FOR THE FAR EAST? 
lie Since Americans until recently have given little construction in the West. Yet, from another point of 
if thought to the problems of the post-war Far East, dis- view, ignorance of the Far East renders study of that | 
Hi cussion of the future of this area, containing half the region all the more important, while the possibility 
hat human race, still lags far behind consideration of that a longer time will be available for reflection and 
ne the European shape of things to come. In a sense, debate represents an opportunity not to be lost. 
; this neglect is natural, for Americans know much ASIA’S PROBLEMS AS THORNY AS EU- 
fy less about Asia than about Europe. Moreover, the ROPE’S. The statement is sometimes made that the 
military strategy of concentrating on Germany, the future of the Far East will be easier to settle than 


heart of the Axis, makes it likely that the United 
Nations will face their first tasks of peace and re- 


= 
2 ¢ Meee oer 


that of Europe. Advocates of this theory argue that, 
because Asia has not been torn by hundreds of years 


eee ae ee 


of national antagonism, the slate is cleaner, so to 
Can decisive victory be achieved? Should Germany speak, and less of a terrible past will have to be 
be dismembered—disarmed—de prived of territories erased in order to write the future. Unfortunately, 
in Europe? Should Allies establish military atae- this is an illusion. It is true that the nationalism of | 
istration? Will Russia share in administration! Asia’s colonies and semi-colonies is forward-looking | 
Should Allies countenance German revolution—are ' - ; 1 
. : in character — reminiscent of the movement that 
: Germans capable of revolt? What kind of peace seal tallied fF ee € Mazzini 
+ with non-Nazi Germany? READ raised the hopes of Europe in the days of Mazzini | 
4 and Kossuth—and that, except for Japan, Far East 
if What Future For Germany? ern patriotism has not assumed the form of chauvit- 
Me by Vera Micheles Dean ism. Yet it must be recognized that there are certain 
it y) counterbalancing problems in the East which are 
ie 5¢ likely to provide as serious a test of statesmanship 4s 
mi February 1 — of agensgid pe Benes was ever furnished by the Balkans. 
es REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. : . aline wl 
ee Sultecription, $5; to FPA members, $3. Not only will there be the difficulty of dealing with 
i , a defeated Japan, but from Manchuria to Java, and 
4 
* 


=] = Page Three 
the war,} from Indo-China to India there is an agrarian crisis the United Nations must preserve and extend their 
we need} that must be met in adequate fashion, if the political wartime cooperation. 
‘ the war} and economic modernization of the Orient is to take On this basis it is possible to arrive at certain . 
ets what) place. The complexity of this situation, involving minimum principles of a more or less broad charac- 
ce is the} the antagonism of landlords and peasants and of ter, failing which there will be nothing that can 
e United} divergent political groups, is indicated by the fact properly be described as orderly reconstruction. 
bear on} that in five and a half years of war the government These minima include: measures to prevent Japan 
ent agen-| of fighting China has hardly touched the fringes of from waging future wars; complete Chinese sover- 
seem so} its own rural question. Nor is it wise to forget that eignty over all Chinese territory; the independence 
ntries as) the difficulties of loosening the grip of foreign con- of India; and a sincere, well-planned effort to es- 
Jom sub.| trol over the peoples of Asia are at least as great as tablish self-government in the various colonial areas 
remains,{| those to be faced in developing a constructive na- _at the earliest practicable moment. 
n Offices} tionalism among the nations of Europe and America. APPLYING THE PRINCIPLES. While it is easy 
rectly re. ORDER IN EUROPE VITAL TO FAR EAST. to give verbal expression to principles, application 
is makes} The work of Asiatic reconstruction cannot be car- in practice is quite another matter—a fact which is 
t, who in} ried forward in isolation, but will be related most keenly appreciated among the peoples of Asia. Will 
oncerned| intimately to developments in the rest of the world. China, for example, receive complete control over 
> people,| In fact, just as the military defeat of Japan will be- Manchuria and Formosa, or will successful argu- 
's Closely} come possible only on the defeat of Germany, so the ments be heard for international, i.e., not Chinese, 
churchill, | orderly solution of Eastern questions will depend administration of Formosa and for the maintenance 
quent te. first of all on the establishment of peaceful, demo- of a special Japanese position in Manchuria, as a 
» there jg| tatic conditions in the West. If Europe is divided means of making Japan a “bulwark” against China 
a divorce} by widespread, prolonged civil war after the defeat and the U.S.S.R.? In dealing with a defeated Japan, 
e people of Germany, if the partnership of the United States, will an agreement be made with some of the danger- 
oclaimed | Britain and the Soviet Union is not maintained and —_—_gyg elements that were responsible for war against 
common strengthened, there will be no basis for an interna- us, or will the United Nations do everything in their 
common | ‘onal approach to conditions in Asia. power to encourage the rise of a new nonmilitaristic 
This does not mean that there will then be no Japan? Will the independence of India be granted 
reconstruction in the Orient, but it will be recon- as soon as hostilities cease, or will internal problems 
DEAN struction of the traditional type, with each power characteristic of all nations in the process of de- 
holding its own as much as possible, and with each velopment be used to justify delay? And will the 
- point of oar 4 se ge Pie. a desperate struggle previous rulers of colonies seized by Japan insist ° 
ly of that mus tree nat pas ordship—all — the acute on the outright return of these areas to their own 
sossibilialk internationa tiction characteristic re) outright bal- sovereignty or, where independence does not appear 
ction ai ted igbe politics. In view of the past history immediately feasible, will they agree to some form 
ae of human progress, it would be unwise to say that of international control during the minimum period 
nothing good could emerge from such a situation, necessary for self-government? 
AS EU-| but it would be a minimum of good, paid for with These questions cannot be answered at present, 
» that the| a maximum of blood. It would not be the intelligent but by their actions now the major powers can in- 
ttle type of growth inherent in the concept of the United dicate their intention to choose the forward-looking 
gue thas Nations. . : instead of the backward path. If the United States 
} of ya SOME CRUCIAL ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT should take steps to repeal the Chinese Exclusion 
er, SO t0 ASIA. Since no one can foretell accurately the con- Act and place Chinese immigration on a quota basis, 
ive to be ditions that will prevail in the world at large, or the ‘€ Britain should move to resume discussions with 
ctunatelyy fat East in particular, after the defeat of the Axis, the Indian nationalists, if the Netherlands should 
nalism of suggestions about reconstruction necessarily rest on declare their willingness to join in international prep- 
ahs certain assumptions concerning the future. In East aration of the Indies for self-government, then the 
hent that) Asia there would appear to be three prerequisites for omens for the future of Asia would be favorable 
Mazzini peaceful, progressive development. First of all, indeed. 
Far East: Japan, as well as Germany, must be utterly defeated. LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 
 chauvitk} Secondly, China must continue its resistance until 5 as 
re certain | victory and must remain united in peace. Finally ie a a an 
y an peace ally, Far East.) 
vhich are | 
anship as FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 17, Fepruary 12, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; VERA MicHeLes Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


uling with 
Java, and 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Bis 


Washington News SL etter 


Fes. 8.—In his radio address of December 9, 
1941, two days after Pearl Harbor, President Roose- 
velt promised the American people that “we are 
going to win the war and we are going to win the 
peace that follows.” As current military develop- 
ments show that the United Nations are passing 
from defense to offense on all fronts, Congress is 
almost as keenly interested in the future peace settle- 
ment as in the war itself. 

Although the State Department has been very 
quiet about it, it is known that it has held from time 
to time a sort of “seminar” for the benefit of influ- 
ential Senators and Representatives on the peace that 
is to conclude the present war and on the economic 
rehabilitation of the world of tomorrow. At these 
meetings experts who are studying various phases 
of the situation have appeared to answer the .ques- 
tions of Congressmen in a frank and informal man- 
ner, to keep them abreast of the progress made in 
working out suggestions for a permanent peace. 
Sumner Welles has presided at some of these 
seminars, which have been attended by such promi- 
nent Congressmen as Senators Tom Connally of 
Texas, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, Walter F. George of Georgia, a former 
chairman of that body, Senator Warren R. Austin 
of Vermont, minority member of the committee, and 
Representative Sol Bloom of New York, chairman 
of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. 

Another sign of the times is a resolution that has 
been introduced in the House by Representative 
Karl Mundt, Republican, of South Dakota, a strong 
pre-war isolationist and critic of President Roose- 
velt's foreign policies. His resolution calls for the 
creation of a 32-man bi-partisan commission to study 
peace plans. As Representative Mundt’s resolution 
completely ignores President Roosevelt and provides 
that the peace-planning commission be appointed by 
Secretary of State Cordell Hull and former President 
Hoover, it has but small chance of passing. 

SENATOR GILLETTE'S PROPOSAL. Much 
more significant politically was the resolution spon- 
sored by Senator Guy M. Gillette, Democrat, of 
Iowa, on February 4. His resolution would put the 
Senate on record as approving the basic principles 
of the Atlantic Charter, and advises President Roose- 
velt to negotiate immediately a “post-war peace 
charter” with the other United Nations. According 
to Senator Gillette, the Atlantic Charter is simply an 
agreement between two heads of government. It is 


FOR VICTORY ° 


not an instrument of national policy, since it has not” 
been formally endorsed by Congress or by the repre” 


sentative bodies of any of the other signatory states,” 


The Atlantic Charter has come to fill, in this con” 
flict, the role played by Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen 
Points in World War I—a program of principles 
for the Allies. The other United Nations subscribed 
to the program embodied in the Atlantic Charter in 
the joint declaration signed by them at Washington 
on January 1, 1942. Brazil is the latest country to 
adhere to the declaration, having signed it on Feb- 
ruary 6, 1942. 

EBB OF ISOLATIONISM. Senator Gillette said 


that, if a treaty were signed, it would thwart Jap- | 


anese propaganda that the Atlantic Charter declara- | 


tion extended only to the Atlantic and not the | 


Pacific area. 

Recently, for instance, Japanese propaganda has 
made much of the fact that Britain’s decision to 
abandon its extraterritorial rights in China was not 
accompanied by any action on Hongkong. And 
the Nazis have been busy telling the Finns that 
their territorial integrity will not be respected by the 
Russians when the war ends, despite the fact that in 
Article I of the Atlantic Charter Britain and the 
United States declared that they are not seeking ter- 
ritorial aggrandizement. 

Senator Gillette’s resolution, if carried out, would 
give the Atlantic Charter what Wilson’s Fourteen 
Points never had—the endorsement of the United 
States Senate. It would serve as a clear and unmis- 
takable notification to foreign countries that the full 
authority of the United States government, includ- 
ing both its Executive and Legislative branches, 


stood behind the Atlantic Charter. This might avoid | 


repetition of the tragedy of the Treaty of Versailles, 
which received the signature of an American Presi- 
dent but failed to obtain the ratification of the 
United States Senate. 

These developments in Congress indicate how 
much isolationist sentiment has ebbed since Pearl 
Harbor. They reflect a growing realization through- 
out the country of what Under Secretary of State 
Sumner Welles, in his address to the graduating class 
of the University of Maryland on February 4, called 


“the basic fact” that “in the world of today not even — 
a hemisphere can live in peace and enjoy its liberty, _ 


much less achieve prosperity, if the rest of the world 
is going up in flames.” 
JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


| soil 
Ma 


