

















_ | FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN me ag 
¢ An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff aye er 
of Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Office at New York, 
ne- N. Y., under the act 
on. FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
the 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
ho- 
als. VoL. XVII, No. 44 Avucust 26, 1938 
1 at PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT’S address, pledging Amer- 
ers, ican aid against aggression, creates new problems in 
slo- Canadian-American relations. For an analysis of the 
CeS- basic factors in Canada’s external relations and a sur- 
ace vey of its foreign policy since the World War, read: 
ably CANADA IN WORLD AFFAIRS 
ces, by James Frederick Green 
July 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents a copy 
tier ieeeels 
hole 
ured ROOSEVELT PLEDGES AID TO CANADA 
e to 
ated RESIDENT ROOSEVELT reaffirmed the Monroe The President's declaration is thus important 
e. In Doctrine last week by pledging American assist- primarily in view of Britain’s position in Europe.. By 
splay | ance in case of aggression against Canada, and gave protecting Canadian ports and islands from inva- 
nt to | new support to the St. Lawrence waterway proposal. sion, the United States would in effect be insuring 
been | Speaking on August 18 at Kingston, Ontario, where Britain of vital supplies of raw materials, foodstuffs, 
their | he received an LL.D. degree from Queen’s Univer- and munitions. The military consequences of Amer- 
berg | sity, the President declared: ‘“The Dominion of Can- ican action were immediately recognized in German 
unci- | ada is part of the sisterhood of the British Empire. newspapers, which concluded from the President's 
ice” | I give to you assurance that the people of the United address that the United States would unquestionably 
States will not stand idly by if domination of Cana- favor the democracies against the dictatorships in 
salted dian soil is threatened by any other empire.” This any future war. 7 
cheir | SUarantee of Canadian territory strengthened the ap- By referring to Canada as included in “the fellow- 
€ the peal for international cooperation made by Secretary ship of the Americas,” President Roosevelt apparent- 
wal Hull in a radio broadcast on August 16. The Secre- ly opened the way for Canadian membership in the 
that | of State had vigorously denounced the violation Pan American Union. The Dominion has never 
neu of treaties and overthrow of established govern- joined the Union, partly because it was a kingdom 
nail ments, and reiterated his faith in international law, and member of a world-wide empire, and partly 
: aa disarmament, and reduction of trade barriers. because it wished to avoid intervening in disputes 
oi Both addresses were more important in implica- between the United States and Latin American coun- 
‘The | tion than in content. Issued as warnings to Germany __ tries. The desire of the American government to de- 
ce its | 4nd Italy as tension increases over Spain and Czecho- fend democracy in the Western Hemisphere may 
unced | Slovakia, they supported Britain and France in their eventually lead to Canadian membership in this 
of the | ‘forts to stave off European war. Although the spe- organization. 
lously cifically excluded any “entangling alliances,” Secretary Because of the attention given his remarks at 
Jected | Hull made it clear by implication that the United Queen’s University, the President’s second speech on 
‘resent | Sates was concerned with the outcome of present August 18, dedicating the Thousand Islands Bridge 
. from | events in Europe. The President’s territorial guaran- across the St. Lawrence river, was completely 
‘other | ‘> While merely a restatement of traditional Amer- eclipsed. President Roosevelt urged Canadians to 
t Ger- | ©4m policy regarding the Western Hemisphere, might join in the development of the St. Lawrence water- 
council easily have far-reaching effects, in view of Canada’s way which, he claimed, would make every city on 
ons in | Position in the British Commonwealth. As the Do- the Great Lakes an ocean port and would increase. 
osition | Minion automatically becomes a belligerent when rather than decrease railway traffic. Charging that 
Britain is at war, it is obliged to intern enemy ships, every electric power development in this region, ex- 
‘LOR {Cease trading with the enemy, and grant the British cept the Ontario Hydro-Electric Commission, is con- 
—— | navy use of its bases at Halifax and Esquimalt. Un- trolled by one American company, the President 
a der the doctrine laid down by President Roosevelt, once again championed public ownership and opera- 
belligerent reprisals involving “domination of Cana- tion of the St. Lawrence navigation and power re- 
dian soil’ would be resisted by the United States. sources. ’ 



































In both addresses the President indirectly sup- 
ported the Dominion government of Premier W. L. 
Mackenzie King against its powerful adversaries in 
Ontario and Quebec. Prime Minister Hepburn of 
Ontario, who was conspicuously absent at both cere- 
monies for the President, has opposed the waterway 
project on the ground of expense, damage to rail- 
ways, creation of excess electric power, and invasion 
of provincial rights. The Prime Minister of Quebec, 
M. Maurice Duplessis, has formed an entente cor- 
diale with Premier Hepburn against the King gov- 
ernment, partly to protect Montreal as the major 
port on the St. Lawrence. President Roosevelt's re- 
marks on foreign affairs likewise strengthened the 
political position of Prime Minister King, who has 
been advocating a “North American policy” for Can- 
ada, with no commitments to either participation in 
oversea wars or unconditional neutrality. Reliance 
upon American defense against invasion would per- 
mit Premier King to combine his isolationist policy 
with Anglo-American cooperation, thus undermining 
the demands of the Conservative party for greater 
participation in Empire defense plans and retaining 


popular support in Quebec. 
JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


FRANCO VETOES WITHDRAWAL PLAN 

The Chamberlain policy toward Spain received a 
further setback on August 21, when the text of 
Franco's reply to the London Committee’s plan for 
the withdrawal of foreign ‘“‘volunteers’”—already ac- 
cepted in principle by the Loyalists—was published. 
Since there are at least 40,000 Italian troops fighting 
in behalf of Franco, compared with less than 10,000 
volunteers on the Loyalist side, the London plan had 
originally proposed that an international commission 
arrange for the proportionate reduction of the vol- 
unteers from each side. Franco rejects this proposal 
outright, merely suggesting that both sides withdraw 
10,000 “volunteers”—a move which would deprive 
the Loyalists of all foreign troops but leave Franco 
with at least 30,000 Italians. 

Franco ostensibly rejected the Committee’s plan 
for proportionate withdrawal of volunteers on the 
ground that a foreign commission could not ascertain 
the number of volunteers, which have been absorbed 
in many different combatant units. The note adds 
that it would be impossible to suspend hostilities in 
order to allow the commission to make a count, and 
objects that such a commission might meddle in the 
internal affairs of the country. Franco also charges 
that the Committee’s plan would not cover volun- 
teers from countries which do not belong to the 





Page Two — 





Non-Intervention Committee, such as the United 
States. Although the Burgos government believes 
the closing of land frontiers should be permanent— 
thus cutting off the Loyalists’ source of supply—it 
rejects entirely any provision for supervision of air- 
ports. The note also declares that inspection of ships 
should take place at the port of departure rather than 
in Spanish waters. While Franco agrees to the estab- 
lishment of two safety zones in Loyalist territory and 
to cooperation as far as practicable in limiting the 
scope of military objectives in air raids, he insists that 
his government rightfully possesses all the conditions 
necessary for unconditional recognition of belliger- 
ency. He consequently rejects the restrictions which 
the Committee would impose upon the right of 
search, and also the proposed contraband list. 


Although Franco’s government would be entitled 
under ordinary circumstances to have its belligerency 
recognized, the note overlooks the fact that his 
régime is dependent on Italian-German support, in 
violation of the plan for withdrawal of volunteers of 
February 1938. Franco is therefore in no position to 
invoke the principles of international law. While 
the Burgos authorities reaffirm the pledge that Na- 
tionalist Spain will never ‘consent to the slightest 
mortgage of its soil,” it is plain that the London 
Committee cannot accept proposals which clearly 
discriminate against the Loyalists. Franco’s note im- 
plies that Nationalist Spain, now militarily checked 
along the Ebro, is not strong enough to win the war 
without continued German-Italian aid. Within re- 
cent weeks there have been reports that Mussolini 
has sent additional planes and men to Spain, and 
Franco’s rejection of the London Committee's pro- 
posal may mean that Italy will now intervene even 
more openly in the hope of terminating the war be- 
fore winter. Faced with the problem of Czechoslo- 
vakia, Mr. Chamberlain will probably do nothing 
fundamental in regard to Spain while Parliament 
is not in session. It is likely, however, that the French 
government, confronted by the breakdown of the 
London proposal, will meet the Italian challenge by 
opening its frontier to the Loyalists. In such a case, 
the United States—in the matter of its own embargo 
—will have the embarrassing choice of following 
either the British or the French lead. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 





America Gropes for Peace, by Harold B. Hinton. New 


York, Johnson Publishing Co., 1937. $2.00 

A simple survey of current international problems with 
particular reference to their bearing on the United States’ 
search for peace. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 44, Aucust 26, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiiz Burtt, President; Dorotuy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHEetes Dean, Eéftor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 





181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





By 


M 


