



nent 
ated, 


Thich 
> Na- 
rence 
ents. 
\eans 
coer- 
ction 
EXiC0 


ibing 


gnize 
which 
on of 
rican 
id re 
nator 
Rela- 
g, the 
ON 


ney H. 
ORES. 


Iter H, 


gn Re- 
evoted 
rality” 
ie Far 
exico’s 
nerica. 

policy 

rofer- 


of all 


N aboth 
. $3.00 
n Ter- 
volume 
1erical 


les Ed- 
3.50 
‘olonial 
jointed 
is at 


narized 


—————— 
National 
1, Editor. 


|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the a 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 






oy 
S oo 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorpo 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


a 








Vou. XVII, No. 41 


Avucust 5, 1938 





THE WESTERN POWERS 


AND THE SINO-JAPANESE CONFLICT 
by David H. Popper 


Will the new balance in the Pacific assume the form 
of an imperialist deal with Japan or a constructive 
general settlement? This report reviews the work of the 
League of Nations and the Brussels Conference, the 
ideological struggle of the powers, and the accelerating 
naval race in the Pacific. 


August 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents a copy 


! 

Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March 3, 1879, 











Général Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michican 











JAPAN AND USSR CLASH 


ON SIBERIAN FRONTIER 





ay tH Japanese occupation of Kiukiang on 
July 26, the struggle for Hankow has entered 
a decisive phase. Serious tension in Soviet-Japanese 
relations, caused by clashes on the Manchoukuo 
border, has failed to divert Japanese attention from 
its drive up the Yangtze River. Since the end of May, 
Japan has concentrated its main strength on this 
front, where it is employing a combined offensive 
force of military, naval and air contingents. The real 
struggle for Hankow, however, is just beginning. As 
Japan’s lines of communication lengthen, the Chi- 
nese defenders will have greater opportunities to 
counter-attack at vital points. As at Hsiichow, these 
tactics are likely to weaken the striking force of 
Japan’s front-line detachments and slow down their 
tate of progress. With its main forces occupied by 
the Yangtze drive, Japan is unable to cope adequately 
with growing Chinese resistance in the “conquered” 
areas. The Japanese offensive in Shansi has slowed 
down, and there seems to be no immediate possibility 
of a Japanese crossing of the Yellow River west of 
Chengchow. 

Under such circumstances, it would seem that 
Japan was in no position to court a conflict with the 
Soviet Union. Nevertheless, the incident at Chang- 
kufeng, near the Siberian-Manchoukuo-Korean fron- 
tier, has developed into the gravest crisis in Soviet- 
Japanese relations during recent years. Beginning on 
July 11, when the Japanese first took exception to 
the presence of Soviet border forces at Changkufeng, 
the incident was rapidly worked up to serious pro- 
portions by Japan’s press and officialdom. Mamoru 
Shigemitsu, Japanese Ambassador at Moscow, was 
teported to have threatened that Japan would resort 
to “force” unless the Soviet troops were withdrawn. 
Complete silence prevailed at Moscow until July 21, 
when the Soviet press released an official com- 
muniqué detailing the exchanges between Foreign 





Commissar Litvinov and the Japanese Ambassador. 
M. Litvinov had bluntly told Shigemitsu that 
threats would get nowhere at Moscow, and then 
added that “full calm reigns on the frontier, and this 
calm may be disturbed only by the Japanese-Man- 
churian side, which in such case will bear responsi- 
bility for the consequences.” Following this sharp 
Soviet rejoinder, officials at Tokyo claimed that Am- 
bassador Shigemitsu had never threatened force, 
press comment was muzzled, and Japan seemed to 
have backed down. On July 31, however, a division 
of Japanese troops attacked and occupied the'Chang- 
kufeng heights. A strong force of Soviet regulars 
recaptured the hill on August 1, while at Moscow 
the Foreign Office exhibited to the press maps which 
indicated the disputed area to be Soviet territory. 

Recent statements by British officials have also 
brought Great Britain into the arena against Japan. 
Addressing the House of Commons on July 26, Prime 
Minister Chamberlain declared that after long and 
anxious consideration the British government had de- 
cided that it could not satisfy China’s request for a 
loan. He then stated that this rejection did not “ex- 
clude other forms of assistance, financial or other- 
wise,” and that proposals of this kind were “under 
consideration by the government departments con- 
cerned.” Foreign Secretary Halifax followed on 
July 27 by declaring before the House of Lords that 
the government was “considering possible action”’ if 
it did not secure adequate protection against Japanese 
encroachment on British interests in China. 

The United States faces the same problem. In a 
note of May 31, the American government had re- 
quested Japan to restore certain properties and to 
permit American nationals to return to their places 
of business in cities on the lower Yangtze. The Jap- 
anese reply on July 6, with later supplementary in- 
formation, made some concessions but claimed that 










































UE TAI CRY ROE TEA ES 














ee Fe 


wer 


alee S9 eag cee 





enennnnennte 
———— 














full compliance was not possible because of dis- 
turbed conditions in the Nanking-Shanghai region. 
On July 18 Secretary Hull indicated that this re- 
sponse had not settled the issue to the government's 
full satisfaction. Another aspect of Japanese-Ameri- 
can relations was emphasized several days later 
when the Munitions Control Board released figures 
on the value of Chinese and Japanese purchases of 
American war materials. From April 30, 1937 to 
June 30, 1938, China had bought $13,795,000 worth 
of American “munitions,” in the strict sense of the 
term, while Japan had bought $9,384,000 worth. 
From January 1, 1937 to May 31, 1938, however, the 
United States had supplied Japan with more than 
$273,000,000 worth of ‘“‘essential war materials,’ 
while China's total purchases during this period—in- 
cluding non-military items—amounted to only $67,- 
000,000. Application of the Neutrality Act, it should 
be noted, would ban American exports in the first 
category but not those in the second. T. A. Bisson 


CHAMBERLAIN CONTINUES APPEASEMENT 


As the British Parliament adjourned last week for 
a three-month recess, Prime Minister Chamberlain 
and his Foreign Secretary, Viscount Halifax, out- 
lined British foreign policy in respect of Czecho- 
slovakia, Spain, the United States and the Far East, 
expressing confidence that the dual policy of ap- 
peasement and rearmament could restore security to 
Europe. Denying that the British government has 
been “hustling” the Czechs, the Premier argued in 
the House of Commons on July 26 that the mediation 
of Viscount Runciman, welcomed by both Germany 
and Czechoslovakia, offered great hope that the 
problem of the Sudeten Germans could be solved 
amicably. 


Both Mr. Chamberlain and Lord Halifax went 
out of their way to stress the importance of securing 
a negotiated settlement with Germany. On the basis 
of exploratory conversations with Captain Wiede- 
mann, the aide of Hitler who came to London a few 
days before the royal visit to France, the British 
statesmen hope to use their Czechoslovakian media- 
tion as the first step in a gradual compromise with 
the Reich. By proving to Hitler that he will not per- 
mit “ideological considerations” to stand in the way 
of an Anglo-German agreement, Mr. Chamberlain 
plans to act as the honest broker on the European 
continent. 


With regard to the Spanish civil war, the Prime 


Minister repeated on July 26 his policy that the 
Anglo-Italian agreement should not come into effect 


Page Two 








— 


until ‘‘a settlement of the Spanish question” had beep 
reached, a contingency apparently further postponed 
by recent Loyalist victories in the Ebro River valley, 
Labor and Liberal opponents of the government fear 
that during the Parliamentary recess Mr. Chamber. 
lain will accept some partial settlement favorable to 
General Franco as a basis for completing the British 
arrangements with Mussolini. The Prime Minister 
did not deny that the Anglo-Italian agreement might 
come into effect during the coming months, presum- 
ably in return for fulfillment of the British plan for 
withdrawal of foreign troops which the Non-Inter. 
vention Committee adopted on June 21. 

While the British government has been thus ep. 
deavoring to enhance its diplomatic prestige through, 
out the world, it simultaneously has been rushing its 
preparation for the war which may occur in case its 
appeasement policies fail. In accepting Sir Joh» 
Simon’s £1,000,000,000 finance bill on July 15, the 
House of Commons has approved the vast armameny 
expenditure scheduled for the present fiscal year. Ip 
addition to the £340,000,000 already appropriated, 
the House authorized on July 20 a supplementary 
expenditure of £22,900,000 for expansion of the 
aviation program, including air defenses for Londop 
Viscount Nuffield has begun construction of a ney 
airplane factory, costing £3,000,000, where he e 


pects to produce 1,000 Spitfire fighting planes, withs | 


speed of 350 miles per hour. 

While the aviation program is still being retarde! 
by government red-tape and lack of facilities fo 
wholesale production of airplanes, the government 
is pushing ahead with its plans for production ip 
England and for training pilots in Canada. The 
Canadian government has agreed to train British 
flyers within its own defense department, but not 
allow independent British establishments on Canadi- 
an soil. The War Minister, Mr. Leslie Hore-Belishs 
announced on July 28 another of his reforms of the 
British army, offering a scheme by which men witly 
out means can enter the officer training schools and 
advance from the ranks. Pay and pensions for army 
officers have been raised, the retirement age limits 
lowered, and two thousand captains and lieutenants 
promoted, in order to provide a younger and more 
democratic officer corps. 

Despite the bitter opposition of Labor and Liberal 
members to the Chamberlain foreign policy, which 
has aroused vitriolic attacks from Lloyd George and 
Winston Churchill, the Prime Minister seems to be 
increasing his prestige and power as the realistic 


pacifier of Europe. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 41, AuGust 5, 1938. 


Published weekly by che Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonpD Lgsiig BUELL, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


B81 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











