


PERIODICAL Roos 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
uly. oF mice 


AUG 13 104g 
Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of Hichigan 


Ann Arbor. Michtoan 








FOREIGN POLICY 


BULLETIN 








and 
not 





Lich An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
yme FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
1 in 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





$50. Vo. XXV, No. 43 


Avucust 9, 1946 





pay 


in, 
ose ne Germany and Japan, which form 
7 the central problems in peacemaking in Europe 
a /and Asia, are not on the agenda of the 21-nation 
| conference which opened in Paris on July 29, dele- 
gates at the Luxembourg Palace are keenly aware that 
precedents now being established in connection 
t | with the conclusion of treaties with Italy, Finland 
sed | and the Danubian states will carry great weight in 
determining how peace will be made with the prin- 
rent | ipal Axis powers later. Accordingly, Belgium and 
sent | the Netherlands, who feel that their views are be- 
ing ignored in the handling of the German question, 
i” | and New Zealand and Australia, who have long 
feared that the great powers might ignore their ad- 
vice on the Pacific settlement, have taken the lead 
in efforts to prevent the Big Four from dominating 
| the Peace Conference. During the past week these 
small independent powers—whose number does not 
include Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland, the 
ted, | Ukcaine and White Russia, all of whom vote with 
Russia in a more or less solid bloc—waged a diplo- 
matic battle against the Big Four within the vitally 

<n 4 important Committee on Rules. 

BIG-FOUR UNANIMITY IN PARIS? In one 
encounter the small nations insisted that the Confer- 
ence elect its own chairman rather than submit to 
the suggestion of the recent Council of Foreign 
Ministers that the Big Four and China rotate the 
ofice among themselves. This attempt failed on 
August 3, when Foreign Minister Molotov strong- 

| ly opposed any change in the chairmanship plan 
n of | submitted by the Foreign Ministers, and the United 

States and Britain supported his stand. In a second 

and even more important revolt against domination 

| by the great powers, the smaller states demanded 
| that a simple majority rather than a two-thirds vote 
seve | —as proposed by the Big Four—suffice to adopt 














| SMALL NATIONS SEEK PRECEDENTS FOR DEALING WITH GERMANY 


recommendations by the Conference to the Foreign 
Ministers concerning the peace treaties. This effort 
placed the Big Four in a serious dilemma. On the 
one hand, none of them was willing to have the 
hard-won agreement of the Foreign Ministers easily 
upset. On the other hand, Britain and the United 
States, especially, were reluctant to appear as the 
opponents of the small nations’ demand that the 
Conference be more than a rubber-stamp for the 
treaties drafted by the Big Four. 

In an effort to find a compromise solution, Britain 
suggested that the Conference send two kinds of 
proposals to the Foreign Ministers—‘‘suggestions,” 
which would require only a majority vote, and “rec- 
ommendations,” which would require a two-thirds 
vote. Then, in order to insure the effectiveness of 
the “recommendations,” Secretary of State Byrnes 
brought forward a plan whereby the Foreign Min- 
isters would be bound by these proposals when it 
nrepared the final drafts of the treaties. Even if the 
British and American suggestions are adopted, how- 
ever, the small nations will almost certainly find it 
extremely difficult to muster a two-thirds majority 
on any important questions, and the doctrine of 
great power unanimity as the prerequisite to the 
conclusion of the peace treaties will remain funda- 
mentally unchanged. 

BIG FOUR DIVIDED IN GERMANY? While 
the Big Four assiduously avoid making any conces- 
sions to the demands of the small nations that might 
impair their unanimity on decisions already reached 
by the Council of Foreign Ministers, they find them- 
selves openly divided in Germany. Just one year 
after the conclusion of the Potsdam agreement, 
which was to form the foundation for Allied policy 
toward the defeated Reich until a peace treaty could 
be concluded, this agreement is in danger of being 


| Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 





- Gpdrneee cs PRESET gt ho ave QSAR SETH * 
(amcor - FS a : on get on = 
wu Ear y : eran <> idieaiat ane 9 ee ee ea 
dey We secs attrac Sn gees a sents Ee - 6 = Oe et 
wey - pr Prt orem _- : seeded eae Se ces 
, - om LB 2 mn oer Tae = w enon 


al 
y 
} 
$ 
a 
vi 
ts, 
¥} 
- 
i 
ij 
4 
* 











entirely nullified. In fact, it may be said that the 
Potsdam arrangements have never been fulfilled, 
for one of their basic provisions was that Germany 
—despite its partition into four zones of occupation 
—should be administered as an economic unit. This 
plan was based in part upon a recognition of the 
fact that Germany had a highly integrated economy 
which could not be disrupted during the period of 
military occupation without creating enormous eco- 
nomic problems for the Allies, particularly Britain 
and the United States, whose areas of western and 
southern Germany normally relied for a large part 
of their food supply upon the agricultural areas 
within the Russian zone. In addition, the mainte- 
nance of economic unity in Germany was regarded 
as essential to the eventual reintegration of the coun- 
try. This policy Russia, Britain and the United States 
avowedly endorsed, on the twofold assumption that 
German unity was a historical fact which could not 
be ignored, and that partition of the Reich would 
lead to bitter rivalry among the Big Three for Ger- 
many’s support. 

Despite the Potsdam agreement, Germany has 
been administered during the past year as four sep- 
arate states. As one result of this failure to treat the 
various zones as an economic unit, Britain and the 
United States have been obliged to shoulder a heavy 
relief burden in Germany, which has made it ap- 
pear that they—rather than the defeated state—are, 
in effect, paying reparations. Even more important, 
Germany has been subjected to the economic poli- 
cies of four separate powers rather than to a single 
Allied policy. In the absence of over-all arrange- 
ments, Britain and the United States have dealt with 
their zones primarily on a day-to-day basis and 











— ——— 
these conditions Britain and the United States hay 

repeatedly called for the prompt implementatiog 
of the Potsdam economic’ program for Germany, 
However, since neither London nor Washingtoy 
could devise any method of enforcing compliang 
with Potsdam which would not run the risk of jp. 
curring outright Russian opposition—thus leading 
to the very partition of Germany they sought tp 
avoid—it seemed that the Western powers wer 
caught in a hopeless impasse. In what Mr. Byrnes up |: 
described on July 11 as a “last resort,” the United it de 
States finally attempted to secure the economic rein. | haps 
tegration of Germany by inviting all or any of the) ¢o:6; 
other occupying powers to undertake economic @| nop, 
operation with the American zone. Britain, with sociz 
considerable reluctance, accepted this invitation op mili 
July 29, and negotiations for economic merger of} <ive 
the American and British zones are now underway.| jp o 
The French have not indicated what their reply will} jj 
be, but it appears at least possible that they may} of ¢ 
eventually follow the American and British lead | o¢ ; 
It is, therefore, upon Russia that major responsibility upli 
now rests for the decision as to whether the Reich | ety 
shall be divided into “eastern” and “western” Ger. | Arg 
manies. | Stat 

What Russia’s course of action will be is not yet 


pro-f 
elem 
selve: 
move 
provi 
the / 
roel 

right 
remc 





he 
entirely clear. Although Marshal Vassily D. Soke. | of 
lovsky, Russian military governor in Germany, ex-| it} 
pressed his disapproval of the American plan on' que 
July 30, he has not flatly rejected it. Face-to-face ap 
with the prospect of a definite break with the West. | Arg 
ern powers in Germany, Russia may possibly decide} fo, 
that the disadvantages which would accrue from this! ga) 


situation outweigh the advantages of exclusive eco | 23, 
nomic and political control over its own zone. If this 


ten: 
awaited implementation of the Potsdam plans, but conclusion is not reached in Moscow, the theory of! jt, 
Russia has virtually integrated its zone into the So- Big-Four unanimity as the basis for peacemaking | tip, 
viet economy by means of its reparation collections will have suffered a far more powerful blow than | ad; 
and provision of raw materials to German factories it is likely to receive at the hands of the small nations | prc 
producing goods for Russian consumption. Under at the Paris Conference. = WINIFRED N. HADSEL | pay 
WASHINGTON WELCOMES NEW REGIME IN BOLIVIA af 


The violent revolution that flared up in Bolivia 
on July 19 was a spontaneous, popular and anony- 
mous attack upon the dictatorial Villaroel régime, 
which itself had taken power by violent means in 
December 1943. Three days later President Gual- 
berto Villaroel was assassinated, and his government 
was supplanted by a junta of teachers, students and 
workers headed by Dr. Nestor Guillén, Dean of the 
Supreme Court of La Paz. The uprising started with 
demonstrations by professors and students of the 
University of La Paz, and was reinforced by the 
industrial workers of the capital, who called a gen- 
eral strike, and by units of the Bolivian army which 
deserted to the revolutionary cause. As exiled oppo- 
sition leaders began to return to the country, pro- 
visional President Guillén promised free elections, 


restoration of civil liberties and press freedom, and ah 
a general amnesty for political prisoners. Since this | | _ 
transitional government is predominantly civilian | | 
and leftist, it is probable that the coming elections 

will bring to power a more representative adminis | 
tration than was the case in the last elections held in 

1940, when only 85,000 of Bolivia’s three and a half 

million people voted. 

VILLAROEL’S RADICAL PROGRAM. In the | 
future, Villaroel’s rule may be remembered princ- 
pally for his efforts to effect a radical transformation 
of economic and social conditions in the Indian | > 
Republic. The social drive behind the 1943 coup was | tie 
contributed by the MNR (National Revolutionary , 
Movement), a political coalition of intellectuals and 
workers. The MNR was colored by nationalist and | « 





L 





















































=| — Page Three 
rave ro-fascist sentiment and allied itself with certain garding the series of murders and atrocities for 
tion} elements in the Bolivian army which described them- which it was responsible. The emphatic stand of the 
any} selves as ‘‘anti-capitalist.” To the extent that this State Department undoubtedly contributed to the 
ston movement was committed to a program of social im- _success of the July 19 counterrevolution, and it may 
ance} provement, it was in many respects comparable to be assumed that the United States will recognize the 
in the Argentine nationalist revolution. But the Villa- Guillén junta, since it is Washington's understand- 
ding roel government went further by recognizing the ing that the revolution has diminished Perén’s 
t to] ight of labor to organize, prohibiting the arbitrary chances of consolidating an Argentine bloc in South 
were} removal and transfer of union leaders, and setting America. 
Mé} yp labor services. By strengthening trade unionism Whether the new government will be able to act 
uted! it departed from the nazi-fascist pattern, and per- independently of Argentina is a matter of consid- 
reif-| haps prepared the way for its own downfall. As the — erable conjecture. Landlocked Bolivia is less a na- 
the! foreign relations of the Villaroel régime became tion than a frontier—the great, sprawling frontier 
(0 more strained and internal problems multiplied, the of three aggressive Latin American countries, Brazil, 
with) social drive lost its momentum. The nationalist- Argentina and Chile. The instability of its econ- 
100} military clique took refuge in increasingly repres- omy, peculiarly dependent on the export of one 
t of! sive measures, including a rigorous press censorship, product, tin, is another reason why Bolivia is so 
Way. in order to maintain itself in power. sensitive to outside pressures. The country is largely 
will It is impossible to dissociate the domestic causes dependent on foreign sources, especially Argentina, 
may) of the revolution of 1943 from the larger complex for its requirements of wheat, processed foods, con- 
lead. of inter-American relations. The remote Bolivian sumer goods, and machinery. To shift the emphasis 
lity uplands were then the scene of political warfare from tin mining to agriculture, as Bolivians hope to 
‘eich | between Germany, working with and through the do eventually, requires the opening up of the eastern 
Ger | Argentine military government, and the United lowlands, which lie 600 to 1,000 miles away from 
States. In the Blue Book published in February 1946, La Paz and 11,000 feet below that city. 
t ye} the Department of State presented documentary evi- The exploitation of the great tropical hinterland 
oko | dence that the Villaroel régime had come to power calls for resources of transport, labor and capital 
’ @ | with assistance from Buenos Aires and Berlin. The which Bolivia does not possess. The country’s diffi- 
1 On question of recognizing the Bolivian régime became cult economic situation, moreover, subjects it to ex- 
“face | g pawn in the more important contest centering on tremes of social agitation, as Villaroel’s experience 
Vest Argentina’s position in the European war. In return so aptly demonstrated. As a result of new educa- 
ecide for certain concessions from Villaroel, the United tional opportunities and improvements in the legal 
| this | States recognized the revolutionary junta on June status of the peon and the miner, the Indians have 
eco | 23, 1944. Although the Bolivian government os- become increasingly restive and_ self-conscious. 
: this tensibly shifted its support to the United Nations, Whether they will be satisfied with the painfully 
ry of | its policies have followed closely those of Argen- slow pace at which reforms must be conducted to 
king | tina. Washington continued to press the Villaroel be permanently successful, or will demand more 
than administration to eliminate the influence of fascist sweeping action, depends on two factors: the quality 
tions groups and individuals in the government. In com- of statesmanship that the new leaders of the Bolivian 
EL pany with all the Latin American nations except government may display ; and the attitudes which 
Argentina, the United States only a month ago made neighboring countries adopt toward Bolivia in this 
and | formal protest to the Bolivian government re- extraordinarily anxious moment in its history. 
this OLive HOLMES 
ities Just Published— . 7 
tions | | AMERICAN INVESTMENTS IN EUROPE— OER tae Oe ae 
ris: | The Record and the Outlook A useful summary, with many quotations from docu- 
Id in by Harold H. Hutcheson ments and official speeches, but little attempt at critical 
half analysis. 
25 cents Nationalism and After, by Edward H. Carr. New York, 
August 15 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS Macmillan, 1945. $1.25 
| the REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month A thought-provoking essay tracing nationalism’s devel- 
rinci- Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. opment and considering how it may shape up in postwar 
ation times. 
idian FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 43, AuGust 9, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
> was Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dgan, 
nary | — Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
d | Please allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 
be F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
and Qos 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





r 





SSR A LIT 


: 
SS tse ee 


justine cna ee cars eat Ta ee 
ere ase 7 
ergo 


Washington News Letter 




















BROADCASTS AND LIBRARIES PROMOTE U.S. POLICIES ABROAD 


The United States relies on its official interna- 
tional shortwave broadcasts to advance our cause in 
areas where we compete for influence with the So- 
viet Union, primarily Eastern Europe. Daily broad- 
casting programs have now become recognized and 
probably permanent instruments of foreign policy 
for 49 governments. The objective of these pro- 
grams is to win the populations in the listening 
countries to the social and political customs of the 
broadcasting nation. The decision of Congress, after 
long debate, to appropriate $19,000,000 to finance 
the State Department's international informational 
program for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1947 
enables the United States to carry forward its pro- 
gram in this field, first exploited seriously during 
World War II through the Office of War Informa- 
tion and the Office of the Coordinator of Inter- 
American Affairs. 

U.S. INFORMATION ABROAD. Some observ- 
ers of the work of the State Department Office of 
International Information and Cultural Affairs have 
been critical. ‘As I visited many of the countries in 
the old world last year, I found that other powers 
did a much better job in informing other countries 
about themselves than the United States,” Chester 
E. Merrow, Republican of New Hampshire and 
member of Foreign Affairs Committee, said in the 
House on July 16. While still imperfect, the con- 
duct of State Department informational activities 
has improved since Mr. Merrow saw them in op- 
eration. Broadcasts today go out in 24 languages to 
67 countries. The budget provides for 3,100 em- 
ployees, who spread information not only through 
broadcasts but through motion pictures (of which 
a film on the Tennessee Valley Authority is the most 
popular with foreign audiences), through exchange 
of peoples, and through libraries. 

Eastern European governments have readily 
agreed to the establishment of American libraries 
in their capitals, and have not prohibited their 
people from listening to American broadcasts. The 
Polish government has made available governmental 
radio stations for rebroadcasting American short- 
wave programs from platters. Once a week Polish 
stations broadcast recordings prepared in the United 
States on topics relating to American transportation, 
agriculture, political institutions, etc., and after the 
broadcasts Polish professional groups discuss the 
scripts on the air. The broadcast and the daily news 
summary, which the State Department distributes by 
radio to diplomatic missions abroad, furnish news- 








19: 
papers in the receiving countries, including Easter 
Europe, with large quantities of American news, 
Partial censorship has at times limited the use Ru. 
manian and Hungarian newspapers make of this | ggg 


officially disseminated information. 

News bulletins are displayed in the American 
libraries in Belgrade, Sofia, Bucharest, Budapest 
and Warsaw. In the Belgrade library last February 
820 visitors were attracted daily by the news bulle. | —— 
tins, three copies of which are on view each day in | _— 
a special room. The Bucharest library invites all 
comers to listen to the “Voice of America” informa | 
tion program emanating daily from its loud speak. 
ers. The Belgrade library also provides weekly lec. 
tures on American subjects, and distributes pictorial 








maps of the United States to Yugoslav children. The m 
State Department informational officers have less | ns 
freedom in Russia than in neighboring countries, | p,,, 
but the Soviet government in June increased to | with 
50,000 the number of copies of the United States ty 
official magazine, America, distributed monthly in | an 
the U.S.S.R. at 80 cents a copy. Assistant Secretary of | 4, , 
State William Benton estimated, in testimony before | ‘a. 
the House Appropriations Committee this spring, | .,., 
that each copy had from 5 to 50 readers. pos 

SHORTCOMINGS OF THE PROGRAM. The | .... 


Administration’s interest in conducting the program | ¢, 
rests generally upon the hope, that from knowing 





about the United States, foreign peoples will come , «d 
to think well of this country; and specifically from | 
the expectation that presentation of official views 

on current questions will win support for American . 
policies. Letters from foreign listeners (500 Italians a 
wrote in February, 1,800 in May) increasingly re- | sy 
veal that interest exists abroad in American radio 

programs. Yet many chiefs of diplomatic missions L 
abroad remain unpersuaded that the broadcasts and | <i 
other programs are politically advantageous, and ac | 
cordingly discourage the operation. Political officials id 
in the State Department tend to deny officials con: | ¢ 
cerned with public affairs any participation in the i 
formulation of policy, for whose explanation to |) 
people overseas the publicists are responsible. They | |) 
also try to control the selection of information and y 
cultural officials for foreign posts. The result is that | res 
the officials in charge of information make less of a a 


contribution to policy than their position warrants, 
and that many inexperienced or ill-suited persons ate | | 
inadequately handling the United States informa | |. 
tional program in foreign capitals. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


ers 


