


bert, 
ould 

pro- 
night 
lirect 
-with 
scar, 
lands} 4 
states 

But 
ould 

Na- 

and 
ment 


com- 
ll as 
ound 


y of 


inda- 
that 


| pre: 
ut of 
aulle 
Free 


irbed 


s the 
yn to 
; for 
mo- 
; and 
anny 
nited 
nited 
and 
re it 
pos: 
xX 








———— —— — arene arte ae _—_ 


* Sishop Enieed 6s 2a 
niver-t4. ~ 


. , wn . 
~ Sity of 


“ichigan Library 


Ann Arbor, 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vout. XXI, No. 32 


May 29, 1942 





—_ 


MEXICO MOVES TOWARDS WAR 


— by the.sinking of two of its tankers 
off the Florida coast on May 13 and 21, with a 
loss of twenty-four lives, the Mexican government 
embarked this week on the parliamentary steps pre- 
liminary to a formal declaration of a state of war 
against the Axis powers. Mexico’s sudden shift from 
pro-Allied nonbelligerency to participation in the 
struggle was caused by the German reaction to its 
sharp note of protest over the first torpedoing. 
Whether through diplomatic ineptness or calculated 
defiance, the Nazis not only refused to reply to the 
Mexican communication, but sank the second vessel 
—which, like the first, had been an Italian ship im- 
mobilized in a Mexican port and taken over by the 
Mexican government—on the very day set by the 
Mexicans as a time-limit for the German response. 
In the face of this evident insult, Mexico’s pride and 
sense of dignity apparently demanded adoption of 
the most vigorous measures. 

WHY MEXICO FIGHTS. It would be a mistake 
to imagine that the Mexican war declaration neces- 
sarily represents universal insistence by the masses 
on the need for hostilities. To do so would be to 
assume that Mexican political processes are equiva- 
lent to our own, and that the widespread suspicion 
and fear of the United States which have been felt 
for decades below the Rio Grande have been for- 
gotten in a few months. On the contrary, the rela- 
tively small attendance and lack of enthusiasm at 
the mass meeting arranged by the official Party of 
the Mexican Revolution in Mexico City’s central 
plaza, on May 24, indicate that the Administration 
is moving ahead of and to some degree independent- 
ly of public sentiment—as is often the case in that 
country. The principal unofficial advocates of a war 
policy appear to be the Mexican Workers Confed- 
eration. (C.T.M.) and the Left-wing political 
gtoups, which have called for the strongest support 
to the Allies since the Nazis attacked the Soviet 


Union, as well as some democratic elements of the 
center. The opponents may be found among the 
extreme conservatives, quasi-fascist groups, and the 
naturally isolationist agricultural population. 

But although the government may be moving 
more swiftly than some circles in Mexico may have 
desired, it is undoubtedly expressing the general 
distaste for Nazi methods current in the Americas 
and implicit in the resolutions of the Rio de Janeiro 
conference. Its attitude is influenced, too, by the 
close economic ties with the United States which 
partially offset the loss of overseas trade cut off by 
the blockade. Thus, over 90 per cent of Mexico's 
foreign commerce is now with this country. Mexi- 
can economic stability is becoming increasingly de- 
pendent on the flow of United States funds to the 
south for the purchase of silver, strategic minerals 
and other products, and for construction of roads, 
railways, public works and industrial enterprises.* 
Once Mexico is committed irrevocably to the Allied 
cause, there is reason to believe that this relationship 
may become even more intimate. 

Because of the state of public opinion,.the Mexi- 
can government has taken pains to indicate that its 
direct military participation in the war effort will 
be limited to defense of its own territory. As a re- 
sult, the war declaration will alter Mexico's policy 
of continental solidarity more in degree than in 
kind. That policy, formulated by President Manuel 
Avila Camacho and members of his Cabinet, is one 
of self-protection and cooperation in the produc- 
tion of vital materials as the country’s principal con- 
tribution to hemisphere security. To implement it, 
the government has called for national unity and 
a general internal political truce. Hence the mili- 
tary effect of Mexico's belligerency should be, first, 
to improve the still imperfect collaboration with 
United States forces in territorial defense; second, 





*Foreign Policy Bulletin, April 24, 1942. 


Back owes. 








Pres os 














to accelerate the re-equipment of Mexico’s army of 
some 60,000 men (with a roughly equal number of 
reservists) with modern weapons from this country; 
and third, to utilize Mexico’s small navy of three 
2,000-ton gunboats and 11 coastal patrol vessels, as 
well as its air force of about 100 planes, in com- 
bating Axis submarines now marauding in the Gulf 
of Mexico. Within the country itself, moreover, 
there is room for a marked increase in the scope and 
effectiveness of measures taken against Axis na- 
tionals, sympathizers and economic interests. Con- 
gress may soon authorize the seizure of all Axis 
properties. 

CHALLENGE TO LATIN AMERICA. In a 
sense, the Mexican action will serve as a challenge 
to other. nonbelligerent Latin American countries 
which, while hesitating to declare war, have co- 
operated extensively to curb fascist activities in their 
territory and strengthen hemisphere defense. Brazil, 
Venezuela and Uruguay have lost merchantmen to 
Axis submarines, and Brazil in particular has 
aroused the wrath of the Nazi propaganda machine 
because of its leading role at the Rio de Janeiro 
meeting and the stern measures subsequently taken 
against Axis nationals and properties. On May 31 
the Brazilian government is putting into effect a 
decree under which Axis subjects and enterprises 
(including, unfortunately, refugees from Axis coun- 
tries) must turn over up to 30 per cent of their as- 
sets to guarantee compensation for submarine at- 


Page Two 








—$—$—— 


tacks on Brazilian vessels. While Brazil may easily 
follow the Mexican example, Berlin no doubt hopes 
that its strong policy will induce Argentina anj 
Chile, the two American republics which have ng 
yet severed diplomatic relations with the Axis, » 
avoid new commitments to the Allies so as not to my 
the risk of involvement. 

Meanwhile, the wartime economic bonds uniting 
the nations of the hemisphere are being drawn eve 
tighter by a series of accords between them. Among 
the most significant is an agreement with Peru ap. 
nounced on April 23, under which United Stata 
funds are to be used to stimulate the production of 
Peruvian wild rubber, to assist in the constructigg 
of public works and agricultural, mining and indus 
trial projects, and to purchase Peru’s surplus cotton 
—usually exported to Brite‘-—for the duration of 
the war. On May 7, moreover, the two countris 
signed a trade agreement embodying tariff reduc 
tions on Peruvian sugar and long-staple cotton. At 
the same time, Peru has pledged full cooperation ig 
the suppression of Axis activities of all types withia 
its territory. To signalize the excellent state of t¢ 
lations with the United States, President Manud 
Prado of Peru visited the United States amid a 
unusual demonstration of reciprocal good will. Thus 
an enlightened economic policy designed for the 
war emergency may prepare the ground for lasting 
improvement in inter-American affairs. 


Davip H. Popper 


ALLIES FACE SEVERE TEST ON ALL FRONTS 


While the Russians, on May 23, admitted the 
surrender of Kerch in the Crimean peninsula to the 
Germans, the confused battleline in the Kharkov 
area continued to sway back and forth, with both 
sides claiming the initiative. It is as yet too early to 
estimate the effect that the Battle of Kharkov, still 
regarded by well-informed observers as a local en- 
gagement rather than the harbinger of an all-out 
offensive, will have on the course of the Soviet- 
German struggle. It already seems clear, however, 
that the principal objective of the Russian High 
Command is not merely to gain territory, but to 
envelop and destroy German forces in various sec- 
tors of the 2,000-mile front. This, too, has been the 





For Teachers, Study Groups and Club Meetings 


Introduction to Pan-America 
A DISCUSSION PACKET 


based on the three HEADLINE Books: GOOD NEIGHBORS, 
CHALLENGE TO THE AMERICAS, and LOOK AT 
LATIN AMERICA. Outline contains geography and history 
lessons, together with supplementary reading materials. 


JUST OUT!! 


25 cents 











primary objective of the Nazis with respect to Rus 
sian forces ever since their invasion of Russia near 
a year ago. 

For the moment, what is important to note is that 
the Germans have succeeded in ousting the Russian 
from the Crimea, which could serve as a spring 
board for a drive toward the oil of the Caucasus 
It has long been predicted that this summer the 
Nazis would begin to feel the need for additional 
oil in order to utilize to the full the industry and 
agriculture of the conquered countries, and woul! 
attempt to reach either the oilfields of the Caucasus, 
or those of Iraq and Iran. For many weeks the Ger 


mans have been massing troops and planes in Bul / 
garia, Greece and Crete for a thrust toward the Nea 


East, possibly by-passing Turkey. In that case, the 
brunt of defending the Near East would have to be 
borne by British and Indian troops stationed in 
Syria and Iraq, which are being supplied in patt 
from new American bases established on the Per 
sian Gulf, and also in the former Italian colony of 
Eritrea on the Red Sea. 

CAUCASUS A RICH PRIZE. But if the Germans 
should attempt an invasion of the Caucasus ares 
across the narrow strait of Kerch, then it would be 





— 


the F 
impac 
Near 
attack 
by th 
lands 
pecter 
overl: 
range 
princ 
coast 
end 1 
Rostc 
they 
fighti 
Th 
Nazi: 
crude 
was ¢ 
75 pe 
17 p 
fields 
day, 
every 
need 
refin 
mans 
woul 
tion 
finer: 
belie 
woul 
norn 
Sea. 
IT 
pecte 
the ¢ 
they 
creas 
A si 
by a 
rene 
1861 
who: 
clain 
the . 
eral 
the 
Afri 
last 
Itali 
to t 
Strat 
fron 
rece 
indi 
to ¢ 


ing 
Ver 
ong 


ates 


{us 


arly 


that 
lans 
ing: 
SUS, 
the 
ynal 
and 
yuld 
Sus, 
set 
Bul: / 
Jear 
the 
> be 
| in 
part 
Per- 
y of 


rans 
rea, 
1 be 








——_—_ 
— 





the Russians who would have to stand the first 
impact of German attack, with British forces in the 
Near East as a second line of defense. A frontal 
attack on Transcaucasia from the Crimea is blocked 
by the loftiest mountain peaks and highest table- 
lands in all Europe. The Nazis, however, are ex- 

ted to invade Transcaucasia by the less direct, 
overland route, skirting the Caucasian mountain 
range, down the coast of the Caspian sea to Baku, 
rincipal oil center of the Soviet Union on the west 
coast of the Caspian. It is significant that last week- 
end the Nazis intensified their efforts to recapture 
Rostov on the Don, gateway to the Caucasus, which 
they surrendered to the Russians during the winter 
fighting. 

The Caucasus would offer a rich prize to the 
Nazis. Russia is the second largest producer of 
crude oil in the world, and its total output in 1940 
was estimated at 220 million barrels. Of this amount 
75 per cent comes from the fields around Baku, and 
17 per cent more from the Grozny and Maikop 
fields on the northern slopes of the Caucasus. To- 
day, in the midst of war, the Russians are making 
every effort to increase the output of high-octane gas, 
needed for airplanes, by installing additional oil 
refineries. Oil experts believe that, even if the Ger- 
mans should obtain control of the Caucasus, they 
would be handicapped in their plans for exploita- 
tion of the oilfields by destruction of existing re- 
fineries under the scorched-earth policy which, it is 
believed, Russia would adopt. Even more serious 
would be destruction of the three pipelines that 
normally carry oil across the Caucasus to the Black 
Sea. 

ITALY’S DEMAND FOR TUNISIA. It is ex- 
pected that, in spite of the hazards of summer heat, 
the Germans will attempt to synchronize any drive 
they may launch toward the Near East with in- 
creased pressure against the British in North Africa. 
A significant move in that direction was forecast 
by a report from Berne, on May 24, that Italy was 
renewing its claims against France for Tunisia, since 
1861 a French protectorate, a large minority of 
whose population is Italian in origin. These Italian 
claims had been relegated to the background after 
the collapse of France in 1940, in spite of the gen- 
eral belief that Mussolini had attacked France at 
the eleventh hour primarily to obtain its North 
African colonies. At that time, however, and until 
last week, the Nazis appeared to have subordinated 
Italian claims against France in the Mediterranean 
to the larger ends of Axis political and military 
strategy. Since Mussolini’s policy is now dictated 
from Berlin, the fact that his claims have suddenly 
teceived the backing of the German press would 
indicate either that Hitler is using them as a weapon 
to coerce Laval, who has not proved as “collabora- 


Page Three 


—— 











On Sunday, May 31, from 12 to 12:15 p.m., E.W.T., 
David H. Popper, Associate Editor of the FPA, will 
speak over The Blue Network. 


Subject: WHY MEXICO GOES TO WAR 


We hope you will listen in and let us have your re 
actions afterwards. 











tionist” as had been expected, or else to pave the 
way for Axis occupation of Tunisia, which would 
serve as an entering wedge for conquest of other 
French colonies in Africa, with Dakar as the ulti- 
mate goal. 


Similarly far-flung developments are under way 
in the Far East where Japan, contrary to general 
expectations, has concentrated on a many-pronged 
offensive in China, instead of immediately follow- 
ing up its conquest of Burma with invasions of 
either India or Australia. Concerted Japanese drives 
toward the interior of China, from the Burma border 
and from the coast, have created serious new prob- 
lems for Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, whose 
spokesmen in Chungking appealed last week for 
planes and more planes. These attacks come at a 
moment when, with the fall of Burma, China has 
lost its principal route of supplies from the United 
Nations, and must increasingly depend for arma- 
ments on its own relatively meager industrial pro- 
duction—except for such war material as may be 
flown into China from India in large transport 
planes. To assure the effectiveness of air-borne sup- 
plies, it would be necessary for the United Nations 
to maintain sufficient air strength in northeast India, 
and to prevent Chinese airfields from falling into 
Japanese hands. Tokyo's attempt to consolidate its 
control of the Chinese coast is thought to have, as 
its primary objective, the elimination of bases which 
might conceivably be used by American bombers for 
raids on Japan. The principal danger of Japan's 
efforts to crush China is that it may strengthen the 
“appeasement” elements in Chungking. 


Thus, while the United Nations are unquestion- 
ably making strides in military training and indus- 
trial production, they are still handicapped in tak- 
ing the offensive by the great initial successes of 
both Germany and Japan, and by their own shortage 
of shipping. The Axis powers, although unquestion- 
ably subjected to increasing strain by the need to 
meet the challengé of growing American industrial 
power, still retain the initiative in all theatres of 
war. Under the circumstances, Americans are well- 
advised to take heed of President Roosevelt's warn- 
ing of May 23 against undue optimism regarding 
isolated glimmers of hope in a global situation that 
remains dark and arduous. : 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 








ities Satin casino ae oe eee eee 


—————*——*<&<_<_<{K[{={z&$==-_==_E=___—>.- Page Four 





ee 





CANADA SEEKS TO AVOID NEW CONSCRIPTION CRISIS 


Canada’s debate on unrestricted conscription, sus- 
pended last week during the United Nations’ Air 
Training Conference at Ottawa, may reach a criti- 
cal stage again in the Dominion House of Commons 
this week. The controversy was aggravated rather 
than settled by the 63 per cent majority given Prime 
Minister King’s bid for freedom of action in the 
April 27 plebiscite. However, the government is 
seeking to translate the public’s mandate into legis- 
lative action by repealing that section of the Na- 
tional Resources Mobilization Act which forbids 
compulsory overseas service. The bill for repeal has 
been given its first reading and is now ready for the 
debate stage which accompanies the second reading. 


Adoption of repeal will simply remove the last 
legislative bar to general conscription. There is still 
no indication that the government intends to ex- 
. ercise the freedom it may receive. Indeed, many 
moderate English-speaking Canadians, who person- 
ally favor an all-out draft, are inclined to support 
the Prime Minister in his present disposition to avoid 
a showdown with French Canada, which voted over- 
whelmingly “no” in the plebiscite. 

Few issues in recent Canadian political history 
have involved more complex and delicate considera- 
tions, and been more potentially disruptive of na- 
tional unity, than that which divides English and 
French Canada on conscription for overseas service. 
Conscription itself, however, has now become a sym- 
bol rather than the chief issue. For it has been 
merged in the much larger area of latent controversy 
which has long made it difficult for the two great 
cultures to achieve national integration. Unfortu- 
nately, the divisive elements have not been confined 
to language and religion but have been complicated 
by social, cultural, and economic differences. At 
bottom, French Canada suffers from a sense of hav- 
ing been treated as an inferior by English Canada; 
on the other hand, English Canada feels that the 
French have not done as much as they might in 
keeping pace with social and educational progress. 
Despite these traditional resentments, leading ele- 
ments in both groups have striven with great pa- 
tience and perseverance for better inter-sectional un- 
derstanding, and until recently had achieved con- 
siderable success. 


KING’S POLICY DEBATED. Canadian friends 
of the Prime Minister say that he has earnestly 
sought to avoid opening old wounds within Canada 


so as not to impede the national war effort. The 
farming of Quebec—and more important, its alumj- 
num, airplane and munitions plants—have made 


great contributions to Canada’s war production prow 


gram, and it is essential that these should be 
tained. Also, with existing exemptions, only 30, 
to 40,000 men in Quebec might be called under 
national conscription act, and this number, it is held, 
is too insignificant to risk a disruption of national 
unity and, therefore, of over-all war effort. 

On the other hand, critics of Mr. King complain 
that his government has spent more time in explain- 
ing Quebec's position to the country than in educat- 
ing the people of Quebec to the extreme urgencies 
of the war. They charge that the campaign for a 
favorable French vote in the plebiscite went largely 
by default; that no effective attempt was made to 
counter the activities of French-speaking politicians 
seeking to capitalize on the popular antipathy to 
conscription. 

Should Section 3 of the National Resources Mo- 
bilization Act be repealed, the following alternatives 
would seem to offer themselves: (1) adopt conscrip- 
tion, thereby possibly risking even bloodshed; (2) 
adopt conscription, but expressly exclude Quebec 
which voted “no” in the plebiscite; (3) postpone 
action for some months and meanwhile plan an 
intensive campaign of political education by gov- 
ernment leaders to explain the critical nature of the 
war emergency to the French people; and (4) aban- 
don all conscription attempts, but relieve the tension 
by diverting public attention to a demand for some 
other form of national sacrifice in the war. So far, 
Prime Minister King has given no clear public indi- 
cation of the course that he intends to follow. 


WILLIAM P. Mappox 





Dawn of Victory, by Louis Fischer. 
Sloan and Pearce, 1942. $2.75 
One of our most experienced foreign correspondents 
looks on wartime Britain and finds it good, then speculates 
on the role of Russia and the United States and on the 
nature of the peace to come. 


South America, with Mexico and Central America, by J.B. 
Trend. New York, Oxford University Press, 1942. $1.00 
This brief summary ranks with the best available de 

scriptions of Latin American life, culture and problems. 

A Short History of Canada for Americans, by Alfred 
Leroy Burt. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 
1942. $3.00 


Sympathetic, entertaining and authoritative present# 
tion of background material. 


New York, Duell, 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 32, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


May 29, 1942. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


ae 81 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Frank Ross McCoy, President; 
Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor; Davi H. Poppsr, Associate Editor. 


Incorporated. National 
Wituiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lam 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 
















| 


VoL. 3 


—_— 


. 


juncti 
gover 
tion ¢ 
givin; 
war f 
part 
Amer 
are b 
Tr ( 
that, 
exora 
peop: 
accou 
whicl 
decla 
agair 
agair 
that 
atone 
spon 
forw 
Whi 
dete: 
was 
coun 
reve 
after 
N 
tion: 
get | 
acco 
face 
med 
This 
“the 
tion 
cede 


