FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


ROR Entered as second- 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff er rea 4 Bele — pg ae: 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year UNIV. OF Micis. Office a New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
te and FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
re 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
obable 
South-| Vou. XVII, No. 28 May 6, 1988 
a took} 
ied 38} MR. BUELL TO BROADCAST FROM LONDON General Library 
etween 
1 more Mr. Buell, who sailed on April 20 for a two- University of Michigan 
*rmany months’ visit in Europe, will broadcast from 
LW ma- London on Sunday, May 8, over the Columbia Ann Arbor, Mich. 
any ad Broadcasting System, at 1:30 p.m., Eastern Day- 
- of its light Saving Time. His subject will be “Economics 
kely to and Democracies.” 
to Ru-| __ — 
the one THE ROAD BACK=-—TO 1914 
nce top ae 
he may ae HE Anglo-French conversations, held in London sure to win control of Eastern European countries before 
nd pet| 4 on April 28 and 29, on the eve of Hitler's visit conomic necessity drives them into Germany's orbit. 
lle posi-| to Rome, represent another milestone on the road Reto ste Se ve pe abe paren Lamang rd: 
d War.| back to the pre-war balance of P nies Behind the return for substantial French concessions on all points 
the out-| guarded language of the communiqué issued at the which might conceivably involve France in a European wart. 
odreanu | close of these conversations lie the following devel- The French government agreed to hasten its negotiations 
YLOR | opments: for an accord with Italy, paralleling the Anglo-Italian deal 
Anglo-French Military Alliance. Britain and France per- of April 16; to support Britain in the League Council on 
fected the defensive alliance they have been developing the question of recognizing Italy's Ethiopian conquest; and 
since March 1936 when, following Hitler’s reoccupation of to consider the re-establishment of control over the Franco- 
Ameri the Rhineland, the two countries agreed to hold consulta- Spanish frontier as part of the British scheme oo poe 
ard Uni.| sons between their general staffs. This alliance establishes drawal of foreign “volunteers” and war materi som 
far closer coordination of British and French armed forces Spain. France, in other words, followed Britain’s lead by 
s entered} than existed before 1914. The principle of unified com- acquiescing in advance in Franco's expected victory. 
with an} mand, laboriously worked out three and a half years after _ Success of Italo-French negotiations depends to a con- 
rbitration} the outbreak of the World War, will be brought into im- siderable extent on the counter-offer which Hitler may 
value is} mediate operation in the next conflict. A French general make to Mussolini during his visit to Italy. As in 1915, 
will command the combined armies of the two countries, Italy finds itself in the enviable if delicate position of in- 
Keesing, | @ British admiral will direct the allied navies, and a British viting bids both from the former Allies, who are ready to 
37. $1.50) officer will control the combined air forces from the moment make diplomatic but not territorial concessions, and from 
e, held at} tither of the two countries is attacked. Germany, which may be expected to offer Italy a share of 
problems} Economic Collaboration. This military alliance will be the spoils it hopes to obtain at the expense of the London- 
eoples iM} ieinforced by economic measures in anticipation of war. Paris axis. Prime Minister Chamberlain tried to strengthen 
educators) Britain and France will begin almost immediately to pool Mussolini’s bargaining position in this week’s negotiations 
al STOUPE) their purchases of supplies, including not only aircraft from with Hitler by delivering a fulsome speech of praise for 
f its di) the United States—where a British air mission arrived on Fascist Italy in the House of Commons on May 2. 
an impeé"} April 25—but also foodstuffs and essential war materials Eastern Europe. It was on problems affecting Central 
of all kinds. Reserve stores of ammunition, oil and other and Eastern Europe, especially Czechoslovakia, that Britain 
ll. Bostot)! war necessities will be jointly accumulated in France, so and France found it most difficult to reach an agreement. 
nl that Britain will not need to transport them across the The British were not ready to go beyond Mr. Chamberlain's 
-y ary Channel for its fighting forces when war comes. France statement of March 24 that Britain would probably be “al- 
ted Stall proposed, in addition, that Britain finance purchases of raw most immediately involved” in a Central European war, 
nat “there| Materials from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Rumania and and once more recommended concessions by Prague to the 
dred Days} ‘ugoslavia. These purchases would have the double object Sudeten Germans. The French, in reply, pointed out the 
War the} o preparing Britain and France for war, and of strength- danger of yielding to Hitler who, intoxicated with easy 
- business | ting the countries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans, successes, might then seek hegemony of the European con- 
ments ..+|threatened by Germany’s drive to the East. Britain pointed tinent. The compromise finally reached was that Britain 
nore inflt-lour that, owing to the Ottawa agreements, the Anglo- and France will separately use their influence in Berlin, 
Itish trade treaty and the pending Anglo-American trade Warsaw and Prague to urge a satisfactory solution of 
————}igreement, it would not be in a position to absorb Central Czechoslovakia’s minority problems which, according to 
d. Nation! European foodstuffs in any large quantities, and suggested the British, must precede further political and economic 
d-class MA that the French proposal be subjected to preliminary study. commitments. Should the Nazis continue to be truculent, 
Should this proposal be carried out, a race might develop Britain and France will jointly warn Germany that war 
between Anglo-French financial power and Nazi pres- with Czechoslovakia may lead to a general conflict. 


a fi i 


i amis: tn i se casi 


This compromise on Eastern Europe failed to clear 
up the situation of Czechoslovakia, rendered pecul- 
iarly difficult by the eight-point program which Kon- 
rad Henlein, leader of the Sudeten German party, 
presented at his party's Karlsbad conference on 
April 24. Throwing off all pretense that the Sudeten 
German movement is inspired by local grievances 
against Prague's rule, Henlein declared that his fol- 
lowers, “like Germans in every part of the world,” 
accept the Nazi ideology, and will “no longer tol- 
erate a state of affairs that means for us war in time 
of peace.” His program includes full equality of 
Sudeten Germans and Czechs, which would mean 
abandonment of the fundamental Czech concept 
that the Germans are a minority in the Czechoslovak 
state; establishment and recognition of the boun- 
daries of the territory settled by Germans, which is 
to be granted autonomy in “every department of 
public life’; removal of “all injustices done to the 
Sudeten Germans since 1918 and reparation for all 
damage they have suffered thereby”; appointment 
of German state employees in all German districts; 
and full liberty for Germans to proclaim their Ger- 
manism and their adhesion to ‘the ideology of Ger- 
mans.” In addition, Henlein demanded revision of 
Czechoslovakia’s foreign policy which, in his opin- 
ion, “has so far ranged this state on the side of the 
enemies of Germany” and created ‘a Slavic bulwark 
against the German Drang nach Osten.” 


While some of these demands might be met in 
modified form by the minority statute being prepared 
by the Prague government—which Henlein has re- 
jected in advance—their complete acceptance would 
involve the establishment on Czechoslovakia’s ter- 
ritory of a totalitarian “state within a state,” and 
force Czechoslovakia into the position of Germany's 
vassal. If Henlein, prodded from Berlin, continues 
to press his autonomy demands, Prague will be con- 
fronted with two equally dangerous alternatives. 
Either the Prague government will sooner or later 
be driven by Czech public opinion to resist these de- 
mands, thus provoking an incident which would 
give Hitler the opportunity to intervene on the 
ground that “disorder” reigns in Czechoslovakia— 
as he did, entirely without justification, in the case of 
Austria; or else Prague must defer to British de- 
mands for further concessions to Henlein, only to 
face the “peaceful” solution of economic strangu- 
lation and gradual dismemberment by Germany and 
its satellites, Poland and Hungary. In neither eventu- 
ality has Czechoslovakia unequivocal assurances of 
aid from Britain, whose course will determine that 
of France. After what has happened to Austria, the 
only way to deter Germany is to confront Hitler with 
a threat of war which is not mere bluff or wishful 
thinking, but a determined intention backed with 


Page Two — 


—— 


overwhelming force. Such an intention Britain and 
France have openly proclaimed in the West, but no 
in the East, where Czechoslovakia seems fated to 
play the rdle of another Belgium. 

Under these circumstances, the strengthened 
London-Paris axis represents a contribution to Euro. 
pean peace only in the sense that it is the least of 
several evils. Now that the annexation of Austria 
and the Anglo-Italian deal have, for the time being, 
ended hope of collective resistance to aggression 
on the basis anticipated in the League Covenant, that 
hope is being transferred to the London-Paris axis, 
which has undoubtedly achieved a far greater meas- 
ure of military and economic cohesion than the 
League has ever possessed. The Anglo-French alli. 


ance, which gives Germany a taste of its own medi. 
cine, may temporarily check Nazi expansion. Or it 
may provoke the very explosion it was <i 1 to 


prevent. Whatever its short-run results, the Angl: 

French alliance, like the Anglo-Italian deal, fails t 
remedy the fundamental problems which threaten to 
provoke war. The Western democracies are allied 
once more for the entirely legitimate but not exactly 
constructive purpose of protecting their own inter 
ests. This should be clearly understood so that, if 
war is precipitated by the new system of alliances and 
counter-alliances, it will be fought under its true 
colors, and not under the slogan of “collective se. 
curity,” which Britain, France and the United States 
have all in various measure served to defeat. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BRITAIN STRENGTHENS THE HOME FRONT 


In his efforts simultaneously to reduce the possi- 
bilities of a European war and to increase the chances 
for British victory should such a war occur, Prime 


Minister Chamberlain has made rapid progress both 
at home and abroad. In addition to its deal wi 

Italy and its defensive alliance with France, de 
British government has settled its historic quarrel 


with Ireland, underwritten its new rearimament pro 
gram with increased taxation, and purchased food 
supplies for emergency use. 

The new Anglo-Irish treaty, negotiated by Premier 
De Valera and Malcolm MacDonald, Secretary of 
State for the Dominions, was signed in London on 
April 25 for three years. It successfully disposes of 
every important bone of contention except the union 
of Northern Ireland with Eire.* The last vestige of 
British rule over Eire is removed by the transfer of 
three naval bases—at Bere Haven, Cobh, and Lough 
Swilly—to the Dublin government. Control of these 
ports had been retained by Britain under the treaty 
of 1921, which ended “the trouble’ of 1919-1920 


*“Britain and Eire Seek an Agreement,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, Janw 
ary 28, 1938. 


(Continued on Page 4) 


U 


Eo 


MAY 
tion’s 

draws | 
of wha 
questio 
weeks’ 
rorms. 
happen 
perwee 
icp ula I 


ment 
special 
Borah, 
ations 
asked 1 
signed 
Lunde 
bill rai 
propos 
drew n 
the ne 
des in 
Walsh. 
mittee, 
the Pr 
of othe 
Nav 


he (, 


the 
minor 
of adc 
duded 


1. An 


—<$—— 


Lin and 
but not 
ated to 


ythened 
o Euro. 
least of 
Austria 
> being, 
>ression 
int, that 
ris axis, 
‘t meas 
1an the 
ich alli. 
n medi 
Or ft 
ed to 
Anglo. 
tails te 
eaten to 
e allied 
r exactly 
mm inter 
that, if 
nces and 
its true 
Ctive se 
~d States 
t. 


DEAN 


FRONT 


Washin gton News Letter 


a= 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


May 2—As the Senate debate on the Administra- 
tion’s $1,154,000,000 naval expansion program 
draws to a Close, the persistent and elusive question 
of what the navy is for remains unanswered. The 
estion has been asked repeatedly during the two 
weeks’ debate. It has been put in many different 
forms. Senator Vandenberg asked bluntly what had 
happened to change the defense needs of the nation 
berween january 21 (when the House passed the 
gular naval appropriation bill granting $549,000,- 
00, the full amount asked by the Navy Depart- 
ment) and January 28, when the President sent his 
special rearmament message to Congress. Senator 
Borah, voicing his conviction that existing appropri- 
ations were entirely adequate for national defense, 
asked what foreign policy the new program was de- 
signed to support. Senators LaFollette, Bone, Nye, 
lundeen and a dozen others who spoke against the 
bill raised specific queries about the relation of the 
proposed increase to events in the Far East. But they 
drew no response. Apart from a blanket denial that 
the new program implies or permits aggressive poli- 
des in Europe or Asia, the only reply from Senator 
Walsh, chairman of the Senate Naval Affairs Com- 
mittee, was a repetition of the justification cited in 


1e possi-|the President's message—the mounting armaments 
- chances |of other naval powers. 


r, Prime} Naval Bases Clue to Policy. While the pages of 
fess both the Congressional Record were barren on the central 
eal Wit Tmestion of policy, and official pronouncements 
nce, Gi iailed to proclaim the purpose behind the expansion 

juarrel program, other sources were more revealing. During 
1enit Pl the week, as the Senate debate droned on, several 
sed food 


minor clues were provided in the form of a series 
of additional requests for naval funds. These in- 


’ Premiet|duded the following: 


retary Of}; Ay authorization bill, reported favorably by the 
ene of Senate and House Naval Affairs Committees on 
pow April 27, requesting over $28,000,000 for im- 
me ae proving naval bases, airfields and ammunition 
‘estige 0 dumps in the United States and certain overseas 
ansfer of possessions. Among other expenditures are $12,- 
1d Lough 665,500 for the Pearl Harbor naval base, to 
| of these provide additional seaplane facilities, a new 
oo graving drydock large enough to take the 45,000- 


ulletin, Janu 


ton super-battleships requested in the expansion 
bill, and additional ammunition storage facilities; 
$75,000 for the naval station at Guam and 


$720,000 for unspecified seaplane facilities in 
the “Fourteenth Naval District,” which embraces 
the Hawaiian Islands and also Midway Island, 
now used as a stepping-stone by Pan American 
Airways. An indication that the latter item may 
be used for a military-naval air base at Midway 
Island is found in the fact that army engineers 
have recently been sent to Midway to complete 
surveys for channel improvements required for a 
seaplane base. Another item is $5,000,000 for 
a new naval air station on Kodiak Island, off the 
coast of Alaska. 


2. A special message to Congress, signed by the 
President on April 28, transmitting supplemen- 
tary naval estimates totaling $25,597,000 for the 
fiscal year 1938. Among other items, the esti- 
mates call for $5,000,000 to begin construction 
of the first two 45,000-ton battleships—the third 
pair to be laid down since January 1937—and 
public works projects at navy yards. 


In these two supplementary measures alone, the 
projects authorized will cost something over $185,- 
000,000 before they are completed. What emerges, 
however, is an indication that the new navy is de- 
designed primarily to fortify the strategic position 
of the United States in the Pacific. The building-up 
of Hawaii, the construction of super-battleships, the 
projection of air bases at Midway and other small 
Pacific islands speak more convincingly than the 
Senate debate of the Administration’s determination 
to bolster American diplomacy by a navy which is a 
dominant factor in the Pacific area. 


Washington Studies Goering’s Decree. State 
Department officials are awaiting a full report from 
the American Embassy in Berlin before taking action 
on the decree issued on April 27 by Field Marshal 
Hermann Goering ordering all Jews to report their 
property in Germany. There is little doubt here that 
the decree will affect foreign Jews with property in 
the Reich, and that if it is enforced American citi- 
zens, along with those of other foreign states, will 
be involved. But officials are unwilling to comment 
on what action, if any, this government might take 
should the property of American nationals be con- 
fiscated or otherwise interfered with by the Third 
Reich. 

Meanwhile, President Roosevelt appointed Myron 
C. Taylor, former chairman of the United States 
Steel Corporation, as the American member of the 
inter-governmental committee recently organized to 


aid the emigration of political refugees from Austria 
and Germany. At the same time, the State Depart- 
ment announced an American National Committee 
to cooperate in furthering the project in this country. 
The members of the committee include James G. 
McDonald, former chairman of the Foreign Policy 
Association and former High Commissioner for 
Refugees coming from Germany; Joseph P. Cham- 
berlain, of Columbia University; Samuel M. Cavert, 
General Secretary of the Federal Council of 
Churches; Paul Baerwald, chairman of the Ameri- 
can Joint Distribution Committee, and others. 
WILLIAM T. STONE 


BRITAIN STRENGTHENS THE HOME FRONT 
(Continued from Page 2) 
by giving the Irish Free State dominion status. The 
government of Eire is expected to provide new forti- 
fications for these ports, establish anti-aircraft and 
other coastal defenses, and create a small navy. The 
Chamberlain government is thus assured that no 
hostile European power will use an embittered Ire- 
land for attacking western England. 

Britain’s surrender of its three treaty ports was 
purchased at a heavy price. The Irish government 
agrees both to pay £10,000,000 as a final settlement 
of the land annuities and to give up its costly efforts 
to secure economic self-sufficiency. The annual pay- 
ments of almost £5,000,000 to British bondholders 
who had financed the purchase of land by Irish 
tenant farmers were suspended by Premier De Valera 
in 1932. The Irish government further promises to 
continue until 1987 its annual payments of £250,- 
000 for damages done during ‘the trouble.” Per- 
haps the most important aspect of the new treaty is 
termination of the tariff war which has raged since 
1932. The new agreement ends both the punitive 
duties with which the British answered De Valera’s 


Page Four 


cancellation of the land annuities, and the retaliatory 
duties with which the Irish counter-attacked. Eire ig 
brought within the framework of the Ottawa trade 
agreements, receiving a free market for its agricul. 
tural products. By placing British coal on the free 


FOF 


An inte: 
DIC A 


aR A 
, OF 


list and pledging a minimum duty of three shillings| xv 
per ton on foreign coal, the Irish government in r¢|——— 


turn guarantees a large market for one of Britain's 
most important export products. 

Although Mr. De Valera failed to achieve his 
major objective—the abolition of partition—he has 
cleared the way toward its ultimate accomplishment, 
The Chamberlain government is expected to bring 
pressure to bear on Viscount Craigavon, the Ulster 
Prime Minister, to increase the political rights of the 
Catholic minority in Northern Ireland. Another a 
peal for a united Ireland was made by De Valera 
when he secured the selection of Dr. Douglas Hyde, 
78-year old Protestant and leader in the revival of 
Gaelic, as first President of Eire under its new con- 
stitution. 

Additional warning to potential enemies that 
Britain’s home front is being strengthened as rapidly 
as possible was contained in the budget message of 
Sir John Simon, Chancellor of the Exchequer. Ad- 
dressing the House of Commons on April 26, the 
Chancellor introduced the largest peace-time budget 
in British history, totaling well over £1,000,000,000. 
The regular defense appropriations are estimated 
at £253,250,000, augmented by £90,000,000 to be 
raised by borrowings and probable supplementary 
appropriations of over £10,000,000 later in the year. 
To provide additional revenue, the government pro 
poses to increase the basic income tax from 25 t 
2714 per cent, the highest rate since the immediate 
post-war period. Increased taxes will be imposed on 


tea, gasoline, and oil. James FREDERICK GREEN 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


The German Octopus, by Henry C. Wolfe. 
Doubleday, Doran, 1938. $2.50 


An excellent popular account of the progress and pros- 
pects of Nazi expansion in near-by countries, by a journal- 
ist who is well acquainted with Eastern and Central 
Europe. The author focusses his attention on conditions 
in the countries which lie in Germany’s path, rather than 
on internal German developments. 


Garden City, 


Hello America! by César Saerchinger. 
ton, Mifflin, 1938. $3.50 


An interesting, anecdotal account of the first years of 
international radio broadcasting, by the former European 
representative of the Columbia Broadcasting System. 
Saerchinger led such notables as King Edward, G. B. 
Shaw, Ghandi and Haile Selassie to the microphone and 


New York, Hough- 


covered many highlights of the past decade’s news. His 
comments on international radio propaganda in Europe 
are especially interesting. 


Japanese Expansion on the Asiatic Continent, by Yoshi §. 
Kuno. Berkeley, University of California Press, 1937. 
$4.00 
This first volume of a projected trilogy on Japan’s con- 

tinental expansion covers events to the end of the 16th 

century, when Hideyoshi invaded Korea at the head of & 


vast Japanese army. Careful use of first-hand materials, 


THE © 


May 1 is 


—_—_ 


STF 
—-- 
ES 

tl 
people 
May 7 
ended 
xis h 
qreatec 
March 
by Hit 
the frc 
mre.” 
expres 
seek, 
emnati 
that | 
friend: 
Minist 
the po 
ation 
Comm 
Rome. 


The 
displa 
May : 
tent F 
the G 
tonve: 
open! 
the A 


with full translations of key documents from Japanese, onsic 
Chinese and Korean sources, makes it the outstanding |fnan 


work of scholarship in this field. The second volume will 


cover the Tokugawa Shogunate; and the last, events since 


the Restoration of 1868. 


of Pr 
ilmos 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 28, May 6, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Leste Bug, President; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


mand 


National Dalac 


Entered as second-class matter 


trike 
dustri 


