1 of 


tion 


pay- 


ecial 
that 


Tous 
stern 
ored 
ritish 
1 an- 
the 
pur- 
ublin 


will 
aven, 
y and 
coun- 
sities. 
EN 


; com- 
ective 
frican 
»0d00” 


erican 
ig As- 
er-De- 


having 
yntrols 
a gen- 
ted to 
d that 
ts. A 
al raw 
impose 
other 
‘nment 
e than 
‘e than 
the re- 
is not 
r like 


National 
ss matter 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FEB 8 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 


TNO 


ly 





ER i¢ C-‘ 








DOM N. Y., under the act 
i - BRARY of March 3, 1879. 
UNLY Vic H. 








VoL. XVII, No. 15 


FEBRUARY 4, 1938 





—_-- 


TRENDS OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
by Winthrop W. Case 


Publication of the van Zeeland report makes this sur- 
vey of current world trade particularly pertinent. Mr. 
Case, associate editor of The Annalist, declares that the 
future of international trade is bound up with the trend 
toward economic nationalism and doubts whether there 
can be any thoroughgoing retreat from present nation- 
alistic policies. 


25 cents a copy 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 











VAN ZEELAND PLAN OFFERS LITTLE HOPE 





— the publication, on January 28, of the 
van Zeeland report, the world has been given 
another program for international economic ap- 
peasement. This report embodies the results of an 
inquiry undertaken by the former Belgian Premier 
last April on the invitation of the British and French 
governments. Its recommendations are neither new 
nor startling. They have been urged before by vari- 
ous committees of the League, the Carnegie Endow- 
ment and the International Chamber of Commerce, 
as well as numerous other organs and individuals. 
The very paucity of official comment on the van 
Zeeland plan suggests that these proposals, however 
meritorions in theory, will once more be relegated 
to the limbo of forgotten documents. What the world 
needs is not more programs, but the will and the 
means to apply those already devised. 

Few will be inclined to dispute M. van Zeeland’s 
premise that the removal of obstacles to interna- 
tional trade is essential to peace and prosperity. It is 
significant that the volume of world commerce dur- 
ing the last year almost attained pre-depression 
levels in spite of existing tariffs, quotas and foreign 
exchange restrictions. While much of this trade was 
directed along uneconomic channels and devoted to 
increasing armaments rather than to raising stand- 
ards of living, the degree of recovery achieved testi- 
fies to the remarkable vitality of international ex- 
change in the face of prevailing barriers. A further 
revival, based on sounder foundations, would dis- 
tribute throughout the world the material benefits 
arising from a greater division of labor. It would 
facilitate solution of the troublesome raw materials 
problem by enabling the poorer countries to acquire 
the purchasing power for those essential primary 
products which they lack at home. 


From an economic point of view little objection 
can be made to the suggestions advanced by the 


Belgian statesman. He rightly emphasizes bilateral 
agreements as the best method of reducing tariffs, 
abolishing quotas and eliminating measures of in- 
direct protection. His recommendation for a multi- 
lateral tariff truce may be considered impracticable, 
since past experience has shown that such an ar- 
rangement, necessarily embodying only the lowest 
common denominator of general agreement, is 
nearly always without value. He advocates retention 
of the most-favored-nation clause in commercial 
treaties so that all countries not guilty of dis- 
criminatory practices may benefit equally from trade 
concessions granted to one another. M. van Zeeland 
realizes, however, that efforts toward freer trade 
on a regional basis have been obstructed by the in- 
sistence that outside countries share the advantages 
of such an agreement without giving any compen- 
sation. Thus Britain has been an obstacle to the lib- 
eralization of trade relations in the so-called Oslo 
group comprising the Scandinavian countries, the 
Netherlands and Belgium-Luxemburg; while Ger- 
many and Italy have utilized the most-favored-nation 
clause to prevent the consummation of a regional 
trade pact confined to the Danubian states. Van 
Zeeland would except such regional agreements 
from the operation of the most-favored-nation 
clause, provided they really increase the total volume 
of international trade and are open on equal terms 
to outside countries. 


To deal with the chaotic monetary conditions 
which undoubtedly constitute the most formidable 
obstacle to world trade, the van Zeeland report 
recommends revision and extension of the tripartite 
agreement of September 1936 and the gradual re- 
moval of exchange restrictions. It is well to realize 
the practical implications of these proposals. If the 
countries subscribing to the tripartite accord are to 
define the exchange rates of their monetary units 





SSS 
A 








and keep fluctuations within certain limits, a state 
of social and economic equilibrium must first be 
reached and maintained in all the participating 
countries. One need only point to France to prove 
that this condition has not yet been fulfilled. To 
facilitate the abandonment of foreign exchange con- 
trols, M. van Zeeland would effect some readjust- 
ment of foreign debts and grant temporary credits 
—through the agency of the Bank for International 
Settlements—to countries who would otherwise have 
to retain such restrictions. Since these measures 
would involve a reduction in German foreign debts 
and extension of credit facilities to the Third Reich, 
they are certain to encounter serious opposition. 

The crux of the problem is political rather than 
economic. Real economic appeasement seems im- 
possible except under conditions of political secur- 
ity. The democratic nations, which are still the pre- 
dominant commercial and financial powers of the 
world, will not want to extend assistance to Ger- 
many, Italy or Japan, without effective guarantees 
that these concessions will not merely strengthen the 
sinews of war of the dictatorships. At the same time 
the fascist powers are not in such a desperate eco- 
nomic position that they would grasp at offers of 
aid on any political terms which may be dictated to 
them. Germany, for instance, is operating its closed 
economy with a success constantly astounding to 
outside observers; and it has made some progress in 
the direction of greater economic self-sufficiency, 
even though at the expense of indefinitely postpon- 
ing any rise in the low living standards of the Ger- 
man people. Nazi leaders realize that acceptance of 
the van Zeeland plan would put Germany at the 
mercy of the Western European democratic bloc 
which is economically more powerful. They 
know it would involve at least a partial return to 
economic liberalism and the reversal of the eco- 
nomic policies pursued during the last five years— 
a pfocess which might entail relaxation of the politi- 
cal controls of the totalitarian state. It is chimerical 
to believe that the present German government 
would publish its budget and public debt figures, 
abandon inflationary deficit financing and abolish 
those foreign exchange regulations which it has 
used to regiment German business and to drive ad- 
vantageous trade bargains with countries in south- 
eastern Europe and South America. Yet all these 
steps would be necessary if Germany were to sub- 
scribe to the van Zeeland plan. 

The decision is now squarely up to the democratic 
countries—Britain, France and the United States. 
Even if they fail to obtain the cooperation of Ger- 
many and Italy in a scheme of economic appease- 
ment, they still have the alternative of concerting 
effective measures among themselves and like- 
minded countries. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


Page Two 





ee 
—— 


LEAGUE EVADES DECISION ON SANCTIONS 


The principal achievement of the hundredth 
session of the League Council—which at France's 
request had been postponed from January 17 to 
January 26—was a reaffirmation of faith by its mem. 
bers in the potentialities of the League. It had been 
rumored in some quarters that Britain and France, 
yielding to the pressure of small powers led by 
Switzerland, Belgium and the Scandinavian coup. 
tries, would acquiesce in their demand for emascy. 
lation of the sanctions provisions embodied in Ar. 
ticle XVI of the League Covenant. These rumors 
had been strengthened by the contents of a report 
which Viscount Cranborne, British Foreign Under. 
secretary, had submitted to the League’s committee 
on reform of the Covenant. In this report Viscoun: 
Cranborne argued that the League could never be a 
success until it had achieved universal membership, 
and that universality would prove impossible until 
the coercive features of the Covenant had been re 
moved. The Cranborne report, regarded as a bid for 
the return of Germany and the entrance of the 
United States into the League, expressed concern 
over the League's tendency to become an alliance of 
“haves” against “have nots,” and its failure to pro- 
vide machinery for peaceful change. 

Contrary to these rumors, Messrs. Eden and Del- 
bos, on January 27, vied with M. Litvinov in re. 
affirming their support of the League. The Soviet 
Foreign Commissar contended that the League—far 
from being an ideological group irrevocably com- 
mitted against the Rome-Berlin axis — counted 
among its members countries of the most varied 
political persuasions ranging from communism to 
semi-fascism, and could still serve as an obstacle to 
aggression. His democratic colleagues argued that 
even a poor League was better than none, and that 
Geneva offered the small powers a forum they har 
never enjoyed before 1920; while Mr. Eden reiterated 
Britain’s readiness to preserve the League and com 
tinue to use it ‘for the purposes for which it is fitted 
By avoiding an open debate regarding the future ot 
the League, the great powers succeeded, for the time 
being at least, in checking the flight of the small 
powers, widely prophesied after Italy's withdrawal 
and Germany's announcement that it would never 
return to Geneva. Unless the committee on League 
reform displays unexpected energy, it may be as 
sumed that Article XVI will remain part of the 
Covenant, but that individual League members will 
enjoy wide discretion regarding its application. Some 
—notably Switzerland, already exempted from mili- 
tary sanctions in 1920—may even be excused from 
economic and financial sanctions. 

While this compromise does not affect the 
League’s activities in the technical, economic and 





(Continued on Page 4) 





Pre 








an 


edth 


nce’s 


nce, 


from 


© and 





Washington News Letter 











— — 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Fes. 1—In the 48 hours which witnessed the 
President’s message on armaments and the strong 
State Department protests against further “acts of 
depredation” by Japanese troops in China, Wash- 
ington observers took note of two other develop- 
ments which shed some light on the current trend 
of American foreign policy. One was the publica- 
tion of the van Zeeland report, which was issued 
without official comment by the State Department 
on January 27. The other was the disclosure that 
British and American naval officials have been en- 
gaged in an extensive exchange of views in London 
during the past three weeks. State Department ofh- 
cials were cautious if not actually cool in their private 
comments on the van Zeeland proposals for eco- 
nomic collaboration between the democracies and 
the dictatorships. Navy Department officials, while 
reluctant to discuss the London conversations, con- 
firmed the fact that Capt. Royal E. Ingersoll, chief 
of the War Plans Division of the Bureau of Naval 
Operations, had conferred with the British Admir- 
alty for the purpose of clarifying, if possible, the 
position of the two countries with relation to the now 
rapidly developing world naval race. Taken to- 
gether, these four developments provide an essential 
part of the background for the most significant de- 
cisions affecting American policy since the world war. 


The armament program. Despite Mr. Roosevelt's 
assertion that the request for immediate expansion 
if the armed forces was made “‘specifically and solely 
because of the piling up of additional land and sea 

nents in other countries, in such manner as to 
involve a threat to world peace and security,” both 
friends and foes of the program in Congress read 
into President Roosevelt's message a firm deter- 
mination to strengthen American diplomacy. Evi- 
dence that the expanded navy is designed to serve as 
an instrument of diplomacy, particularly in the Far 
East, was found not only in the recommendation for 
a flat 20 per cent increase in the authorized strength 
of the fleet, but also in the request that two addi- 
tional capital ships (in addition to four now build- 
ing or authorized) be laid down during the calendar 
year 1938. Some observers, indeed, see in the new 
capital ship program a direct answer to Japan’s 
building program which is reported to include three 
new super-battleships of 42,000 tons displacement. 
If the Japanese program has actually been approved, 








the American program of six battleships establishes 
in effect a new ratio of 2 to 1 in place of the old 
5 to 3 “treaty” standard. 


There are other indications that a new ratio may 
result from the naval program. The President’s mes- 
sage was immediately followed by the introduction 
of a general authorization bill by Representative 
Vinson, chairman of the House Naval Affairs Com- 
mittee, making the recommendations effective. While 
the Vinson bill does not go beyond the recommenda- 
tion for a 20 per cent increase in each category, it 
actually authorizes the maintenance of a navy be- 
tween 50 and 60 per cent ‘stronger than the fleet 
in commission today. The explanation is found in 
the fact that the Vinson bill raises the total tonnage 
of the navy to approximately 1,517,000 tons in 
modern “under-age” ships, whereas the present 
strength in “under-age” vessels is only 919,000 tons. 
Since the expiration of the naval treaties, moreover, 
the government is under no obligation to scrap older 
vessels, and plans have already been projected for 
modernizing capital ships and aircraft carriers which 
have reached the arbitrary age limit. Thus, instead 
of being replacements, every new ship will repre- 
sent an addition to the United States fleet. 


What is contemplated under the Vinson Act is a 
navy consisting of approximately 21 capital ships, as 
compared with the 15 now in commission, supported 
by 8 aircraft carriers and approximately 45 cruisers, 
or 8 more than the total now built and building. 
The destroyer strength will be increased from about 
242 to approximately 275 and the submasiaes from 
86 to 110. The entire program, which will cost in the 
neighborhood of a billion dollars, will not be com- 
pleted before 1943. 


The relation of this gigantic program to American 
policy in the Far East was raised in both the Senate 
and the House last week and will be raised again in 
the weeks to come. But opposition pressure is un- 
likely to block adoption of the program or to clarify 
the immediate objectives of the Administration’s 
foreign policy. Meanwhile, as conversations looking 
toward possible joint naval action with Britain con- 
tinue, invitations to cooperate with members of the 
League of Nations in collective measures to aid 
China are rejected, and proposals for economic 
appeasement are ignored. 

WILLIAM T. STONE 























== Page Four 





LEAGUE EVADES DECISION ON SANCTIONS 
(Continued from Page 2) 


social fields, which have proved most successful, 
it creates further uncertainties regarding the extent 
to which League powers will be prepared to act in 
common when confronted with fresh instances of 
treaty violation or aggression. That League powers, 
as in the past, will be inclined to let sleeping dogs 
lie, is indicated by the Council's handling of two 
burning issues—the treatment of Rumanian Jews by 
the Goga government, and the question of League 
aid to China. While Britain and France have brought 
pressure on Rumania to alter its anti-Semitic policy, 
the Council has taken no action on petitions sub- 
mitted by Jewish organizations, which accuse Goga 
of violating the minorities treaties of 1919. Some 
well-informed observers, in fact, believe that the 
cause of Rumanian Jews would be better served 
by private diplomatic negotiations than by public 
discussions of their plight at Geneva, which might 
merely stiffen the back of the Rumanian govern- 








ment. In answer to China’s renewed plea for aid, 
the great powers at first discussed the possibility of 
a Council resolution which, instead of recommend- 
ing—as on October 5—that League members refrain 
from taking any action which might weaken China, 
would say that the Council ‘‘trusts’’ they will aid 
China within the limits of “feasibility.” The French 
and British cabinets, however, have expressed 
some qualms regarding this proposal on the ground 
that it might provoke reprisals on the part of Japan, 
and have hesitated to take any action without ad. 
vance knowledge of the course which might be fol- 
lowed by the United States. In Geneva, as in Wash. 
ington, moral indignation has been subordinated to 
the colder calculations of self-interest. The im. 
portance of these calculations is sometimes under- 
estimated by over-fervent League advocates, who do 
international organization the disservice of expect. 
ing more from it than it can accomplish at the present 


stage of world history. — 





The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


Dictators and Democracies, by Calvin B. Hoover. New 
York, Macmillan, 1937. $1.50 


The Renaissance of Democracy, by G. S. Gracchus. New 
York, Pegasus Publishing Co., 1937. $2.00 


A Good Word for Democracy, by S. E. Forman. New 
York, Appleton-Century, 1937. $1.50 


Three commentaries on the current tribulations of dem- 
ocratic government, listed in order of merit. Professor 
Hoover, an experienced economist and observer, argues 
that communism, fascism and national socialism are es- 
sentially identical. The totalitarian state—in the Soviet 
Union, as well as in Italy and Germany—involves minor- 
ity dictatorship, constant resort to “the Terror,” and cur- 
tailment of property rights. He offers little encourage- 
ment to democratic countries for, while declaring that 
they can survive only through prevention of wars and de- 
pressions, he doubts whether representative government 
can control a capitalist economy. The pseudonymous Mr. 
Gracchus denounces fascism and advocates a “democracy 
of solidarism” in verbose and uncritical terms which 
would fare badly in a semantic analysis by Stuart Chase 
and Thurman Arnold. Dr. Forman defends democracy 
with eloquent sentimentality, but his superficial remarks 
contribute little that is new. 


The German Universities and National Socialism, by Ed- 
ward Y. Hartshorne. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard Uni- 
versity Press, 1937. $2.00 


Here is a comprehensive and balanced survey of what 
has happened to the German universities. The author 
shows clearly how students and faculty have been “co- 
ordinated” and how the whole of higher education has 
been brought into harmony with the National Socialist 
Weltanschauung. The universities, no longer primarily 
institutions of learning, have been prostituted to the 
socio-political purposes of the National Socialist state. 


Correspondent in Spain, by Edward H. Knoblaugh. New 

York, Sheed & Ward, 1937. $2.50 

An Associated Press correspondent, stationed for four 
years at Madrid, writes of the first eight months of the 
conflict. He fixes his attention principally on the weak 
points in the armor of the Loyalist case—among other 
phases, the early “liquidation” of opponents, the censor- 
ship of news and the war racketeering which accompanied 
the drive for socialization. 


First Act in China: The Story of the Sian Mutiny, by 
James M. Bertram. New York, Viking, 1938. $3.00 
An alert young correspondent recounts his adventures 

on the hazardous trip to Sian, where he arrived just after 

Chiang Kai-shek had flown back to Nanking. The book 

contains a first-hand description of the events which fol- 

lowed Chiang’s release, including the second mutiny which 
had to be suppressed before the advocates of the united 
front against Japan triumphed. 


The Monroe Doctrine, 1867-1907, by Dexter Perkins. Bal- 
timore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1937. $3.50 


This well-written and scholarly volume is probably even 
more of a contribution to the history of American foreign 
policy than its two predecessors. The author shows how, 
after the Civil War, the Doctrine gradually became at 
instrument of intervention and an indispensable political 
myth. In view of new fears of European penetration it 
Latin America, the author’s prediction that the Monroe 
Doctrine has been on the decline since 1907 may prove 
premature. 


Swords or Ploughshares? by Earl Cranston. New York, 
Abingdon Press, 1937. $2.00 
An ethical appraisal of war in American history, a¢- 
vocating collective security for governments and pacifism 
for individuals. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 15, Fesruary 4, 1938. 





Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation# 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lestig BUELL, President; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as second-class matte! 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





F 


A 
DIC. 
AL 
. OF 





es 
Vol 
—— 


TR 





