FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XIX, No. 34 JUNE 14, 1940 


— 


How did Germany gear its economic machine 
for war? Read: 


GERMANY’S WARTIME ECONOMY 
by JOHN C. deWILDE 


25¢ 


June 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York,. 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


JUN ? 0 'S@n Entered as second- 


General Library 

University of Michigan 

hun Av¥har. We nhtoan 
ryERIGDICAL RUVA 


GBNBRAL 
GHIV. OF MIG. 


ITALY STRIKES IN THE MEDITERRANEAN 


S the Germans threw fresh reserves of men and 
mechanized equipment into their drive on Paris, 
Premier Mussolini, on June 10, announced that Italy 
was entering the war on the side of Germany at mid- 
night. France and Britain were thus compelled to 
withstand a concerted Italo-German attack on a front 
stretching from the Atlantic to the Mediterranean. 
Italy's entrance into the war, often forecast, and 
as often postponed, was determined less by Musso- 
lini’s personal decision to launch ‘‘a war of supreme 
independence” than by the Nazi timetable, which 
was being carried out with clocklike precision. Ger- 
man sources had pointed out last week that Italy 
would wait until the last minute, and would enter 
the war only when Paris was besieged or the French 
ait force destroyed, so as to escape the danger of 
French retaliation. Mussolini’s action indicated that 
Hitler believed he was on the point of achieving his 
first objective—defeat of France and conclusion of 
a separate peace—before proceeding to his second, 
and culminating, objective of invading Britain. 


In accordance with German plans, Italy appar- 
ently struck not in the Balkans, but in the Mediter- 
tanean, and exclusively against Britain and France. 
Italy's goal, Mussolini declared, was “to break the 
territorial and military claims that confine us in our 
sea, because a country of 45,000,000 is not truly free 
if it has not free access to the ocean.” He charac- 
terized the conflict as one “of fruitful, useful 
peoples” against “‘plutocratic, reactionary democra- 
cies.” From such decadent nations, I/ Duce intends 
to wrest Gibraltar, Suez, North Africa, and Nice, 
Corsica and Savoy. 


In announcing his decision to go to war, Musso- 
lini promised that Italy would not drag Switzerland, 
Yugoslavia, Greece, Turkey and Egypt into the hos- 
tilities unless these countries adopted a hostile atti- 
tude. The Axis partners obviously hope to avoid a 
war in the Balkans which might only provoke inter- 


vention of the Soviet Union and Turkey on the side 
of the Allies. Italy’s entrance into the war was pre- 
ceded by the restoration of diplomatic relations with 
the Soviet Union, suspended in December when the 
Soviet Ambassador in Rome, Ivan Gorelkin, left 
Rome following anti-Soviet demonstrations on be- 
half of Finland. By this gesture the Italian govern- 
ment hopes to insure the neutrality of Moscow which 
in any case may not be in a military or economic 
position to take action against Germany and Italy. 
The last-minute decision of France and Britain to 
reverse their policy toward Moscow, and send as 
their respective representatives Eirik Labonne, for- 
mer French Ambassador to the Spanish Loyalist 
government, and Sir Stafford Cripps, well-known 
Laborite, may eventually bear fruit. But for the mo- 
ment the Allies have little to offer the Soviet Union 
except the prospect of sharing the burdens of their 
war with Germany and Italy. 

At the moment it is still uncertain whether Tur- 
key will abide by its pact of last October to come to 
the immediate assistance of the Allies in the event 
of war in the “eastern Mediterranean.” There can be 
no question about Turkey’s sympathy, but the Turkish 
government, like others in the Balkans, finds it dif- 
ficult to support a cause which might already be con- 
sidered lost. On the other hand, the Balkan coun- 
tries must realize that neutrality now does not safe- 
guard them against future aggression by the Axis 
powers. Turkey's decision to remain neutral would 
undoubtedly be a severe blow to the Allies who have 
expected to use this country as a basis of operations. 


REVOLUTIONARY STEPS IN FRANCE. Mean- 
while, the French Army was falling back on Paris 
in order to preserve its existence and avoid a catas- 
trophic defeat. Britain, preoccupied in the Mediter- 
ranean and facing the danger of imminent invasion, 
has been able to help France only with its air force 


————SS 


and a few troops. On June 10 the French govern- 
ment was compelled to evacuate Paris. 
Previously, on June 6, Premier Reynaud had ef- 
changes in his Cabinet in an eleventh-hour 
effort to remedy, in the space of a few weeks, the 
accumulated military and political errors of twenty 
years. All the men who had been associated with the 
policies of appeasement and defensive warfare were 
eliminated, and a vigorous campaign was launched 
against individuals suspected of pro-Nazi sympathies. 
M. Daladier, who had signed the Munich accord, was 
removed from the post of Foreign Minister, which 
was taken by M. Reynaud. Charles de Gaulle, an 
advocate of mechanized war newly raised from the 
rank of Colonel to that of Major-General, was ap- 
pointed chief assistant to M. Reynaud at the War 
Ministry, while Paul Baudouin, president of the 
Bank of China, became the Premier’s assistant at the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Jean Prouvost, pub- 
lisher of Paris-Midi and Paris-Soir, was made Min- 
ister of Information. Albert Sarraut, Minister of 
Education, and Anatole de Monzie, Minister of Pub- 
lic Works, were dropped. 


Many of these changes had long been urged by 
the young generation, who profoundly resented the 
corruption, incompetence and red tape of post-war 
political rulers. The near-sightedness, vindictiveness, 
lack of realism, and inertia of these men had made 
it increasingly difficult for France to maintain a rdle 


== Page Two 


a" 


of leadership on the continent. Like so many of the 
measures taken by the Allies, M. Reynaud’s shake. 
up became possible only when the enemy was at the 
gates, and may again prove “‘too late.” Yet jp 
retrospect it will be difficult to exaggerate the sig. 
nificance of the revolution through which France, 
as well as Britain, has passed since the invasion of 
Belgium and Holland—a revolution whose effects 
will leave an indelible mark no matter what may be 
the final outcome of the war. 

While the Battle of France may mark the end of 
one phase of the conflict, it may prove only the be. 
ginning of a far wider struggle on the periphery, 
as the British Dominions, the countries of Latin 
America where German agents are actively at work, 
and the United States become in one way or another 
affected by the course of events in Europe. This 
struggle is not merely between nations, but also be. 
tween conflicting groups within nations—a civil war 
superimposed on an international, and ultimately 
perhaps intercontinental, war. The shape of this 
struggle had been visible, as in a microcosm, during 
the Spanish civil war, whose prophetic significance 
had been clearly understood by Germany, Italy and 
Russia, but had merely caused the Western powers 
to take refuge in a policy of ‘“‘non-intervention,” 
which ultimately permitted the totalitarian states to 
destroy the democracies one by one. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE PLANS ITS ECONOMIC DEFENSE 


The United States must consider Latin America 
both as a source of danger and as a source of 
strength. The danger springs from alarming reports 
of Nazi Fifth Column activities in such widely sep- 
arated points as Uruguay, which German agents are 
said to have designated as the focal point of a new 
drive on Latin America, and Mexico. The strength 
lies in Latin America’s ability to supply us with vast 
quantities of industrial raw materials and foodstuffs, 
essential for the peace-time economy of the United 
States and vital in time of war. The Fifth Column 
menace is being attacked on two fronts—local ac- 
tion taken by the individual Latin American gov- 
ernments to unearth and stamp out such activities, 
and general reinforcement of Western Hemispheric 
military and economic defense. While several Latin 
American governments took hurried steps to rearm,* 
the United States dispatched two heavy cruisers to 
southern waters as visible evidence that this country 
intends to protect Latin America as part of its own 
defense program. 

Even more significant, perhaps, is the fact that 
the Administration is investigating plans for eco- 
nomic cooperation with Latin America on a scale 
which would have appeared fantastic a few weeks 


*Cf. Washington News Letter, Foreign Policy Bulletin, June 7, 1940. 


ago. While it is too soon to predict the precise form 
which the new inter-American economic defense 
might take, it has been suggested that an Inter 
American Marketing Board be established to take 
over full control of all Latin American exports. An 
agency of this kind — financed largely by United 
States capital, perhaps through the intermediary of 
the Inter-American Bank—would serve not only to 
assure to the United States all available supplies of 
Latin American strategic materials, but to bolster 
Latin America economically without running the 
political risks inherent in dealing directly with a 
Nazi-dominated Europe. Another line of action en- 
visages marketing agreements with respect to indi 
vidual commodities. 

Economically, the United States and Latin Amer- 
ica are not fully complementary. Although trade re- 
lations are close, each area has a large exportable 
surplus which cannot under any conceivable circum: 
stances be consumed in full by the other. Exports, 
however, are of far greater importance to the Latin 
American economy than to that of the United States. 
In contrast to Latin America, the United States is 
powerful enough to trade with the world on its own 
terms, without having to yield to economic pressufe 
from the Nazis. During the recent past, the United 


————— 
—— 


States has 
han a thir 
ihe latter 
ally, the [ 
4600,000, 0 
jestined fo 
of course, 
which acco 
America’s € 
Roughly 
4 maximur 
write the a 
sold outsid 
1936-38 re 
United Sta 
normal im 
000 tons O 
200,000 tc 
200,000 to 
wheat and 
few major 
of the com 
on the do 
An Inter- 
would finc 
Latin Ame 
fequiremet 
exposing 
gaining p 
American 
the econo! 
would in 


Americas t 
Macmills 
An Ame: 

political tr 

book combi 
ing number} 

often out o 


The Invis 
Council « 
An exce 

prohibitior 

formal sck 
the comple 

American: 

forms of | 

strictions 
represent 
act itself. 


These Rul 
Merrill, 
A rathe 

sonalities 


FOREIGN FP 
Headquarters 
Entered as se 


Bo 181 


N 


oa 


Sates has purchased an average of somewhat less 
han a.third of total Latin American exports. With 
ihe latter averaging around $2,000,000,000 annu- 
illy, the United States’ share has been roughly 
$00,000,000, leaving a balance of $1,400,000,000 
destined for other markets. These markets include, 
of course, other Western Hemispheric countries, 
yhich accounted for about $200,000,000 of Latin 
America’s exports. 

Roughly then, it would ‘‘cost” the United States 
,maximum of $1,200,000,000 annually to under- 
write the average Latin American exportable surplus 
sold outside the Western Hemisphere, based on the 
1936-38 record. If this had been done in 1938, the 
United States would have bought—in addition to 
sormal imports — 10,000,000 bags of coffee, 700,- 
00 tons of meat, at least 5,600,000 bags of sugar, 
200,000 tons of wool, 1,500,000 bales of cotton, 
200,000 tons of hides and skins, 1,950,000 tons of 
wheat and 2,737,000 tons of corn, to mention only a 
few major commodities. For economic reasons, many 
of the commodities so acquired could not be thrown 
on the domestic market without disastrous results. 
An Inter-American Marketing Board, however, 
would find opportunities to dispose of most surplus 
latin American products, after first meeting the full 
requirements of the Western Hemisphere, without 
exposing the individual countries to German bar- 
gaining pressure. Moreover, the additional Latin 
American products purchased as a necessary step in 
the economic defense of the Western Hemisphere 
would include many needed commodities now 


THE F.P.A. 


Americas to the South, by John T. Whitaker. New York, 
Macmillan, 1939. $2.50 
An American journalist’s interpretation of economic and 
political trends in the major nations of Latin America, this 
book combines “human interest” treatment with an annoy- 
ing number of factual errors and a picture of conditions too 
often out of focus. 


The Invisible Tariff, by Percy W. Bidwell. New York, 

Council on Foreign Relations, 1939. $3.50 

An excellently written survey of those restrictions and 
prohibitions on American import trade not found in the 
formal schedule of tariff rates. The author points out that 
the complexities of customs administration, laws protecting 
Americans against unfair foreign competition, various 
forms of administrative tariff action, and quarantine re- 
strictions ostensibly for protection against disease often 
represent trade barriers far more effective than the tariff 
act itself. 


These Rule France, by Stanton B. Leeds. New York, Bobbs- 
Merrill, 1940. $3.00 
A rather unbalanced and unimpressive account of per- 
sonalities and interests in contemporary France. 


Page Three 


bought in part elsewhere. Thus the United States 
could consume much larger quantities of Latin 
American wool, hides and skins, cacao, fibers, vari- 
ous nuts, waxes and vegetable oils, rubber and a 
number of minerals—including tin, provided smelters 
are established. During the first World War, for 
example, United States imports from Latin America 
rose by over $640,000,000, although this increase 
was due in large part to price inflation. 

As an emergency measure in the struggle to pro- 
tect the Western Hemisphere, United States assump- 
tion of full responsibility for the economic welfare 
of Latin America, through operation of a Market- 
ing Board, has considerable appeal. Logically, such 
a program would be accompanied by long-range 
planning to encourage the production of additional 
complementary products in Latin America, in order 
that the entire economic structure of the Western 
Hemisphere might achieve a higher degree of inte- 
gration. 

The use of quasi-totalitarian methods to combat a 
totalitarian challenge appears to be inevitable. There 
is a growing disposition throughout the Western 
Hemisphere to subordinate democratic procedures to 
the conditions produced by new dangers from 
abroad. The development of this frame of mind is a 
normal concomitant of war fears, and may help to 
speed the defense program. Nevertheless, it would 
be idle to ignore the rapid growth of restrictions 
expressed in such measures as the recent press curb 
imposed in Argentina. 

Howarp J. TRUEBLOOD 


BOOKSHELF 


A Navy Second to None: The Development of Modern 
American Naval Policy, by George T. Davis. New York, 
Harcourt Brace, 1940. $3.00 


A definitive study of the evolution of American naval 
ideology, which traces the gradual shift from the objective 
of a navy adequate for coast defense to one powerful 
enough to extend American influence to far corners of the 
earth. After an admirable historical survey of this de- 
velopment, Mr. Davis challenges the traditional concepts 
of sea power as expounded by Admiral Mahan and other 
American navalists. He urges that we call a halt to our 
accelerating naval expansion program until the country de- 
termines just what its foreign policy is and what territory 
and interests it will defend. 


A Diplomatic History of the American People, by Thomas 

A. Bailey. New York, Crofts, 1940. $6.00 

In this highly readable narrative of American diplomacy, 
Professor Bailey studies the relationship between public 
opinion and foreign policy. He succeeds in re-creating the 
spirit of the times he depicts, by basing his scholarly re- 
view on detailed accounts from contemporary magazines, 
newspapers, biographical works, letters, speeches, cartoons 
and posters. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 34, JuNE 14, 1940. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Ss 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leger, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


National 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


JUNE 11.—Italy’s entrance into the war gave the 
President another opportunity to promise “the op- 
ponents of force” the full support of our “material 
resources.” During the past week the government 
had already taken steps to speed aid to the Allies 
who are particularly hard-pressed because of heavy 
losses of equipment in the Battle of Flanders. 

On June 3 the President obtained a ruling from 
Acting Attorney General Francis Biddle, pointing 
out that a statute of July 7, 1919 empowers the 
Secretary of War to sell surplus supplies left over 
from the World War to any corporation or indi- 
vidual. On the basis of this authority the Adminis- 
tration is making arrangements to transfer to the 
Allies, through some “corporation,” a large part of 
its unused stocks consisting of about 2,000,000 ser- 
viceable rifles as well as almost 5,000 75mm. guns. 


The Navy announced on June 6 that it was im- 
mediately turning in 50 naval reserve bombers in 
exchange for future delivery of new planes, with 
the tacit understanding that the manufacturers would 
resell the planes to the Allies. Two days later the 
War Department earmarked 100 Northrop attack 
planes for a similar “trade-in.” These transactions 
are the first in a program which may assume con- 
siderable dimensions within the next few weeks. 

Meanwhile, the defense program has been rapidly 
getting under way. Congress completed action on the 
$1,492,000,000 Navy Appropriation Bill on June 6, 
and is expected to finish consideration of the Army 
bill this week. Other important developments in the 
realm of national defense include: 

1. A decision, made known on June 5, to devote 
a fourth of the appropriations and the personnel of 
the W.P.A. to military projects such as the construc- 
tion of barracks, airports, etc. A ruling of the W.P.A. 
Commissioner, dated the following day, gave pri- 
ority to 73 projects considered of military importance. 

2. Congressional consideration of an Adminis- 
tration bill authorizing the R.F.C. to finance the 
acquisition of strategic materials and the construc- 
tion or expansion and equipment of additional plant 
facilities needed for national defense. 

3. Prompt inauguration of the Advisory Com- 
mission on National Defense, appointed by the Presi- 
dent on May 29. The two key men of the Commis- 
sion, William S$. Knudsen and Edward R. Stettinius, 
have been released by their corporations to devote 
full time to the industrial problems involved in the 


national defense program. Secretary Morgenthau ha 
put Mr. Knudsen in charge of coordinating the vity|, 
machine-tool industry, while the President has given | 
Mr. Stettinius the additional task of heading a boar. 
which will review the present cumbersome purchas. 
ing methods of the government. 

4. The announcement, on June 3, of a play 
whereby the Civil Aeronautics Authority will take 
immediate steps to provide primary training for 45. 
000 new pilots by July 1, 1941, in addition to se. 
ondary training for 9,000 pilots. 

5. An intensive campaign to win the county 
over to the idea of universal compulsory militay 
service. Launched by the Miiitary Training Camp 
Association, this drive has already received the ep 
dorsement of The New York Times in a leading 
editorial printed on June 7. Opinion is widespread 
that voluntary recruitment will no longer be suf 
ficient to secure an adequate army. Already Senato, 
Lodge has suggested an army of 750,000 men; and. 
others are expressing the belief that a still larger| 
force must immediately be trained not only to defend. 
this hemisphere, but to provide for the contingeng| 
of our involvement in the present European wat. 

6. A growing realization of the implications of 
“hemispheric defense.” On June 5 the House and! 
Senate Foreign Relations Committees both approved | 
the Administration resolution committing the United 
States not to “acquiesce in any attempt to transfer 
any geographic region of the Western Hemisphere 

rom one non-American power to another nor 
American power.’ While the resolution provides for 
consultation with other American nations in the 
event of such an attempt, Congress fully realize) 
that the burden of preventing it would fall on the| 
United States. It is also becoming clear that ths | 
country must be prepared to intervene by armed| 
force if Nazi or Fascist efforts to overthrow an 
Latin American government succeed. 


Despite the acceleration of our preparedness pro 
gram, the country may have to accept much mort| 
sweeping measures in the future. The present Ad 
visory Commission on National Defense may have) 
to yield to an executive agency equipped with full 
powers to secure coordination, establish a system of 
priorities, and expand existing bottlenecks in indus 
trial capacity and labor. Still higher appropriation| 
will also prove necessary if the United States is 
arm on the same scale as Nazi Germany before this 
war. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


|FORE 


An inter pres 


FO 


HE TI 
lini at 
for Europ 
destiny of 
ain and t 
terweight 
with the 
army, Ac 
ance and 
scale mil 
tual colle 
an appea 
June 17 
French P 
had assu 
of hostil 
organic \ 
to be eff. 
With 
now cor 
authorit: 
which p! 
the Fren 
relies o1 
sources 
the tide 
vast nev 
a far m 
before « 
to be pe 
north, s 
strongly 
submar: 
its port: 
in the ] 
THE 
the Fre 


in only 
Allies > 


