——— 


a favor. : 


Of meat” 


liberated | 
are Over, } 
1©€ War.’ # 


Welles, 
lopment 
d Wash. 
e short 


to utilize 


> of coe 


There jg 


state by} 


rican un- 


ALKER 


and E. @ 
by E. PB. 


rerses and 
of Lenin 
» conveys, | 
the trials 
pirit with 


+ William 


3. $2.75 


asitates to 
the coun- 
resses the 
ordeal of 
played a 
iseparable 


ew York, | 


Sloan and 


Vewsweek, 
neighbors 
a hopeful 
 there’s a 


okin. New 
Jutton and 


f the De 
xpresses & 
tates will 
war world. 


Tork, Mac- 


in history 
ut various 


@@NBRAL LiBKA! 


= 


WAY, OF MIC" 


ym 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


” 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


; from the / 


d. National 
or. Entered a q 
allow at least® 


Vou. XXIII, No. 39 


Juty 14, 1944 


ROBOT BOMBS POSE GRAVE ETHICAL PROBLEM FOR FUTURE 


ERMANY’S robot bomb attacks on Britain, 
whose effects were surveyed by Prime Minister 
Churchill in a forthright and eloquent speech of July 
6 to the House of Commons, have thrown into sharp 
telief two aspects of the war that tend to be over- 
shadowed by elation over Allied successes in Nor- 
mandy and Russia’s rapid advances toward the Ger- 
man border. First, these attacks indicate that, as 
modern warfare becomes more and more mechan- 
ized, it is also bound to become more and more in- 
discriminate. Technically—but not morally—it is but 
a step from the bombardier in a plane, who, by push- 
ing a button, can discharge a cargo of deadly bombs 
on targets he can see only in the large, inevitably 
killing many innocent civilians who happen to be 
within bombing range and whom he never actually 
sees, to the blind mechanical device of the robot 
bomb, where human decision stops at the launching 
of the weapon, leaving the rest to horrible chance. 
BLIND WARFARE. This killing in the void, 
without visible objectives, which frees the killer, at 
his remote controls, of the guilt complex that in the 
past has haunted sensitive men recalling the faces 
and groans of their victims, is the gruesome reductio 
ad absurdum of wat. No responsible person has ever 
claimed that the process of destroying human beings 
through war is a humane process. Yet many well- 
intentioned reformers have sought to humanize war 
—as if the effects of a conflagration, once it is under 
way, could somehow be moderated and reduced to 
manageable proportions. Today all of us must feel 
like the managers of the Hartford circus. Through 
along train of circumstances—négligence and indif- 
ference on the part of some, careless or wilful action 
On the part of others—humanity has permitted an 
unspeakable disaster to occur. 
What is equally disturbing, robot bombs, once the 
deadly formula has been devised, can be manufac- 
tured with relative ease and at relatively low cost by 


any nation possessing industrial facilities. Industrial- 
ization, which if constructively used could spell such 
great material progress, thus threatens to become 
more than ever the potential breeding-ground of still 
greater and greater catastrophes. Yet surely the 
answer to this man-made problem is not to raze in- 
dustrial plants, as some suggest be done in the case 
of defeated Germany. The answer is to uproot the 
will of some human beings to inflict such suffering 
on fellowmen, to destroy the desire to fight wats 
and, most important of all, to deprive individuals 
who aspire to leadership of their nations of the pos- 
sibility of plunging these nations into conflicts their 
own peoples may dread and oppose. How to accom- 
plish this manifold task is the most crucial ethical 
and political problem of our times. 


POISON OF NAZI TERROR. This problem is 
bound to be greatly complicated by the very brutality 
of the Germans as their hour of reckoning a 
proaches. This is the second aspect of the robot 
bomb attacks that is already casting a shadow over 
the future. For it becomes increasingly clear that the 
Nazi leaders, before they go down to defeat, will do 
their utmost to destroy everything they can, in the 
hope of either frightening their opponents into a 
compromise peace or, if that fails, of leaving such 
devastation, human and material, in their wake, as to 
make the task of reconstruction seemingly hopeless. 
We already know, from what happened in all con- 
quered countries, that the Nazis are determined to ex- 
tirpate systematically the men and women of char- 
acter, talent and courage who would have been able 
to rehabilitate their respective peoples after the war. 
Now Americans who entered Rome have had an op- 
portunity to see at close range the customary Nazi 
handiwork—the brutal killing, by hired thugs, of 
promising leaders among the young generation of 
Italy. It is well that some of us have seen these 


things, have learned for ourselves—not through hear-- 


JUL 15 1944 


ee 
} 


— Page Two ——=_—«gW =" 
say—the full horror of the way in which the Nazis collaborate is already evident in Italy. The Italian | the si 
go about the job of eliminating all who possess a Communists, far from displaying the anti-clerical } diffict 
spark of courage or intelligence. Every human society tendencies expected of them, advocate friendly re. | they : 
has dregs. But it remained for the Nazis to raise the lations with the Vatican. There are some indications provi 
dregs of every occupied country to positions, not of that the Vatican may consider favorably a modus } of mz 
honor, but of er—sheer, untrammeled power to vivendi with the Soviet government which has not } factos 
work evil blindly, just like the robot bombs. only encouraged the revival of the Orthodox Church } [ndia 

WHAT IS THE ANTIDOTE? Having seen all in Russia, but on July 9 announced strict new rules } cies i 
this, what can we, among the United Nations, do about divorce, and fresh efforts to enhance the posi- jectio 
about it? The immediate, the utterly natural reaction, tion and growth of the family. Meanwhile, in Britain } sency 
is to demand an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. the Church of England has exercised a leadership f 
No one doubts that acts of terrible retaliation will similar to that of the Catholic Church and has fur. ¢ 
be committed against the Germans by the peoples of thered an understanding with Russia. es 
the liberated countries—and every effort must be It is, in a sense, a sad commentary on the position a 
made to eliminate Nazi leaders, high and low, who of liberals in this crisis that leaders of the future . 
ordered acts of brutality and coerced others into per- usually do not spring from their ranks. The new | “°° 
‘petrating them. But retaliation cannot in and of leaders, in fact, sometimes seem rather grim and coger 
itself contribute to reconstruction. Nothing that the frightening to liberals, because they seek some form } P a 
Allies can possibly do to the Germans will bring of control rather than return to untrammeled free. | “2° 
back to life the millions who have perished on battle- dom. Although seemingly conservative, these new -— 
fields or in concentration camps, or erase memories leaders do not intend to build a replica of past institu. } *PP* 
of agony and terror from the minds of those who tions and practices. Indiscriminate return to the past oy 
survive. On the contrary, protracted revenge would would mean return to the very elements of conflict he | 
act as a poison left in the world’s blood-stream by and disintegration that facilitated Hitler's conquest |< 
the Nazis—a poison that would circulate long after of Europe. What liberals must understand as they Th 
their defeat, and add an element of ultimate despair re-evaluate the past and weigh the future, is that we { the / 
to the other horrors of war. cannot approach Europe with ready-made blueprints | °° 

The only antidote for this poison is an effort to or artificially created mechanisms of international | 
revive old beliefs and implant new convictions con- relations into which suffering, distraught human be- } /®!* 
cerning the possibility of decent relations between ings must be fitted somehow or other. We must start | 4 
human beings. Today, in Europe, such beliefs and by considering the needs of these human beings, first | PP 
convictions come from two groups which, dissimilar of all—their hunger of mind and soul as well as } * ™ 
as they may seem, have in common a strong organiza- body. Only by restoring the value and integrity of the | 
tion, a coherent philosophy of life, and the ingrained individual can we hope to combat, eventually, both | 
habit of obedience to instructions from on top. These the military and moral implications of such measures } The ‘ 
two groups are the Catholics and the Communists. as robot bombing. " 
The useful role they can play when they decide to VERA MICHELES DEAN Jf of hi 

| MONETARY TALKS REVEAL NEED FOR BROAD ECONOMIC AGREEMENT | iit 
The United Nations Monetary and Financial Con- = and Dr. Harry White, respectively. at 
{ ference in session at Bretton Woods, New Hamp- CONFERENCE MEETS DIFFICULTIES. The | 7. 
‘is shire, from July 1 to 20 has brought together the — draft agreement under discussion at the present con} 6, 
| representatives of 44 governments to consider two ference was issued on April 21 and in itself repre- } its b 
i proposals: an international stabilization fund, and a sents a wide area of agreement.* But serious difficul- | ™*™ 
F world reconstruction and development bank. While ties have arisen during the negotiations which may = 
| the agenda is concerned specifically with the mon- delay concrete action beyond the appointed closing ee 
if etary and investment field, Secretary Morgenthau re- date of July 20. The principal controversy concerns * 
Mi. minded the delegates when he accepted the pres- the apportionment of national quotas to the pro- § form 
t i idency of the conference that “it should be viewed posed $8,000,000,000 fund, but the use of gold and zit 
fle . . as part of a broader program of agreed action the problem of large blocked balances, especially ] the ; 
ia among nations to bring about the expansion of pro- those built up by various countries in London during } of J. 
fi) duction, employment and trade contemplated in the —_the war have also proved perplexing. The usual bar} me 
a Atlantic Charter and in Article VII of the mutual aid gaining for seats on a nine-member executive com wa 
ih agreements concluded by the United States with mittee which is to be set up has also taken place. It is | Fore 
vl many of the United Nations.” Plans for such insti- —_ generally agreed that such a conference was feasible _* 
Me tutions have been studied in detail for more than a at this time only because of the technical nature of | oe « 
Rt year following the original statements prepared for  — : a 
a the British and American Treasuries by Lord Keynes mibinae ee ee ee 
bf 


is ; 


> Italian 


-clerical © 
ndly re.” 
lications ' 


modus” 
has not | 
Church 


WwW rules | 


he posi- 


| Britain 
dership 


has fur. } 


position 
> future 
he new 
im and 
ne form 


a 
— 


Nhe subject, and it may be assumed that the above 


| difficulties can be solved in due course in so far as 
'they are technical in character. But the problem of 


providing the larger quota demanded by the U.S.S.R., 
ot making a proper adjustment that would be satis- 
factory to British authorities for the conversion of 
India’s huge credits into other than sterling curren- 
cies if necessary, reflect, in part, more serious ob- 
jections which have been raised to the plans for cur- 
rency stability. 


OBJECTION TO THE FUND. In England there 


“has been much Parliamentary criticism of the deci- 


i sion to proceed with this matter at all before the 


ed free 


Se New | 


- institu- 4 


the past | 


conflict 
onquest 
as they 
that we 
ueprints 
national 
man be- 
ust start 
gs, first 
well as 
y of the 
ly, both 


1easures 


DEAN 


ENT 


S. The 
ent con- 
f repre- 
difficul- 
ich may 
closing 
concerns 


he prfo-7 
old and® 


pecially 
| during 
ual batr- 
ve COMi- 


ice. It is 
feasible © 


iture of 


’ Foreign 


“more general lines of policy relative to international 


trade have been clarified. This argument has real 
cogency, and some American criticism of the pro- 
posed currency agreement has been based upon it, 
although never articulated here as clearly as in 
Britain. For the most part, however, much of the dis- 
approval which has been voiced in the American 
press since the opening of the conference suggests 
that minor divergences are being invoked to impede 
the progress of the negotiations. 


Thus the counter-proposal contained in a letter to 


; the New York Times of June 21, signed by twenty- 


one Republican members of the House, advocated 
that, instead of having this country participate in a 
joint undertaking with other powers, Congress create 
an American Reconstruction Fund to carry out the 
purpose of the proposed international fund. This is 
a suggestion for unilateral action that indicates a 


SOME RECENT BOOKS 


The People of India, by Kumar Goshal. 
idan House, 1944. $3.00 
An Indian student approaches the history and problems 
of his country from a new angle—the life of the people. 
At the same time he brings into his story outstanding po- 
litical developments from ancient times down to the fail- 
ure of the Cripps mission. A very valuable book. 


New York, Sher- 


The Making of Modern China: A Short History, by Owen 
and Eleanor Lattimore. New York, Norton, 1944. $2.50 
One of the best brief accounts of present-day China and 

its background. The subject is a complicated one, but the 

authors’ broad knowledge and feeling for key trends per- 
mit them to generalize and simplify with great skill. 


Journey from the East, 
Knopf, 1944. $3.75 
An editor of Time magazine furnishes a vivid, highly in- 

formative account of his life in the Far East and the 
United States. Beginning with his boyhood in the Man- 
churian timberland, Mr. Gayn takes the reader through 
the Russian and Chinese revolutions and the recent years 
of Japanese aggression. The result is a well-written, sig- 
nificant analysis presented in personal terms, but reveal- 
ing clearly the meaning of the times. 


by Mark J. Gayn. New York, 


Page Three 


return to the policies pursued in the early inter-war 
years when no thought of tariff reductions or ade- 
quate supply of dollars was contemplated. The same 
may be said for the fear expressed in many quarters 
that the American quota is too large—again reflect- 
ing either a desire to have this country play a lone 
hand, or a refusal to recognize the predominant posi- 
tion the United States has come to play in interna- 
tional economic life. Were the broader economic 
policies which the United States must follow clearly 
understood, such criticism might not arise. 


FURTHER CLARIFICATION NEEDED. On 
the domestic plane these various objections reveal 
the need for further clarification on the part of the 
American public concerning the nature of the com- 
mitments it may wish to support in the post-war era. 
On the international plane the difficulties encoun- 
tered at Bretton Woods are but different reflections 
of the same problems which face the United Nations 
in almost every field of post-war organization. Al- 
though the war is drawing to a close—a fact which 
as Mr. White has said, “has increased the pressure 
for early action” since ‘‘all countries recognize the 
need of having some constructive monetary plan 
ready to put into operation after the war ends”—the 
difficulties which have hampered smooth negotia- 
tions at the conference suggest the overwhelming 
need for an overall international agreement about 
future political and economic relations. If such were 
achieved, it would greatly facilitate the adjustment 
of technical problems by the technical experts. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


ON THE FAR EAST 


Japan: Its Resources and Industries, by Clayton D. Carus 
and Charles L. McNichols. New York, Harper, 1944. 
$3.50 
Written especially for “the many thousands of young 

Americans who will ultimately be trained for post-war 

Pacific and Asiatic administrative and occupational tasks,” 

this book is a concise, highly informative discussion of the 

main aspects of Japan’s geographical and economic posi- 


tion. 
Voices from Unoccupied China, by Liu Nai-chen, Tsai 
Chiao, C. K. Chu, J. Heng Liu, Fei Hsiao-t’ung, Wu 


Ching-chao, Chin Yueh-lin. Edited by Harley Farns- 

worth MacNair. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 

1944. $1.50 

A group of visiting Chinese scholars discuss problems 
of government, nutrition, public health, social relations, 
economic reconstruction and education. [he views ex- 
pressed—as the editor points out in a stimulating intro- 
duction—are “diplomatic,” i.e. they generally conform to 
the official Chungking approach to China’s problems and 
skirt the debatable aspects of present-day China. Never- 
theless, this is a valuable work because it gives the reader 
a genuine feeling for the life and problems of a country 
that has gone through seven years of war. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 39, Jury 14, 1944. 


Published weekly 


by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


, under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


GB 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Ve 
i 
' 
e 
t 
i 

q 


iy 


7 re Y 


—- e— =--s te 


-_—* o 


ee aia 
o 


2 ie Na A ET AP OR & Gua 
. ; 
. ~s 
= *“-* 


Se eg ae a ee ener 
re a 


4 
a ml 2 


ih.eakint-o.4 


— 
To ~; eas 
‘ Peers 


sie si Seat e 
nani 


eal: 


° 


- 5 he ign we eons Binns am OS ss 
° 


Sih anpaiannanneneiasiaen naan 
ere 


a caart 


— 
‘ ne eg, a 


rcs. 


DE GAULLE VISIT PROMOTES UNDERSTANDING 


Relations between the French Committee of Na- 
tional Liberation and the British government have 
become increasingly friendly since General Charles 
de Gaulle, its president, conferred with Prime Min- 
ister Churchill at Marrakesh last January 12. On 
February 8 the British government announced that 
it had reached a financial and mutual aid agreement 
with the Committee, and on June 19 it opened nego- 
tiations in London with Committee representatives 
for an agreement on the civil administration of 
France during the period of liberation. This agree- 
ment has been concluded, but United States approval 
is needed before it can become effective. 


WHY DE GAULLE CAME TO WASHING- 
TON. The strong British disposition to find a basis 
of cooperation with the French Committee was re- 
sponsible in some measure for the arrival in Wash- 
ington on July 6 of General de Gaulle, whose rela- 
tions with the United States government have been 
marked in the past by considerable tension. Britain 
encouraged President Roosevelt to invite de Gaulle 
here, and urged de Gaulle not only to accept the in- 
vitation but to visit Washington in a friendly and 
conciliatory spirit. Other factors contributing toward 
the visit have been the progress of the Allied armies 
in France and the discovery that de Gaulle and the 
Committee have a large popular following in that 
part of France which the Allied armies have freed. 

The talks which General de Gaulle had in Wash- 
ington with President Roosevelt, Secretary of State 
Cordell Hull, and American military leaders, have 
probably laid the foundation for as firm a relation- 
ship with the United States as the Committee has 
with Britain. De Gaulle created a favorable impres- 
sion in Washington. He had discarded the haughty 
manner and uncooperative attitude which irritated 
President Roosevelt when he first met the general at 
Casablanca in January 1943. “I am happy to be on 
American soil,’ he said at his arrival, “to meet Pres- 
ident Roosevelt and to meet those who are relent- 
lessly fighting with us. . . . The whole French people 
are thinking of you and salute you, Americans, our 
friends. . . . Our ardent desire is that the United 
States and France shall work together in every way 
as they are now fighting together, for victory.” 


General de Gaulle came to Washington with the 
understanding that he was not to request recognition 
of the Committee as the Provisional Government of 
France and that President Roosevelt would not ac- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


cord such recognition, although the Committee hay 
long claimed it indirectly and directly. On Novem 
ber 24, 1943 de Gaulle told the Consultative Assem. 
bly in Algiers that “the Committee is in fact the 
government of the French Republic.” On April 4 he 
said that “the powers appertaining to the Prime Min. 
ister [of France} are exercised by the President of 
the Committee of National Liberation.” On May 15 
the Consultative Assembly adopted a resolution that] 
the Committee was to be known as “the Provisional 
Government of the French Republic.” 

Although de Gaulle was not boastful here, per 
sons with whom he talked during his Washington 
stay have the impression he is confident that the 
French people would choose him as their leader in 
any election, and this confidence apparently led him 
to abandon insistence on United States’ approval of 
the action taken by the Consultative Assembly on 
May 15. Henceforth relations between the Commit. 
tee and the United States are expected to develop on 
a friendly basis—with the understanding that, as 
Mr. Hull said on April 9, the United States is dis 
posed to see the French Committee exercise leader! 
ship to establish law and order under General 
Dwight D. Eisenhower, but also wants the French 
people at the earliest opportunity to exercise its soy- 
ereign will freely by choosing its own government. 


FRANCO-BRITISH DRAFT AGREEMENT. The, 


191: 


ra 
whi 
gre: 


draft agreement concluded by Britain with de Gaulle) tem 


reflects this general policy. It is similar in some re 
spects to agreements which Britain signed, with 
United States approval, on May 16 with the exiled 
governments of the Netherlands, Belgium and Nor) 
way. It provides for collaboration between Allied 
military leaders and the French Committee in the 


administration of liberated areas. Unlike the agree} 


ments with the three governments, it does not pro 
vide that matters of state are to be placed ultimately 
in the hands of the Committee: that would be tanta 
mount to recognition. President Roosevelt himself 
negotiated no agreement with de Gaulle, but the 


Washington conversations created an understanding 
on which a future agreement can be based. This um 
derstanding enabled the General to disclose at his 
press conference on July 10 that he intended to move 
his capital from Algiers to territory in metropolitan 
France at an early date. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


con 


