



































~| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN ae 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
Ss 2, 1921, at the Post 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Office at New York, 
- FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated T Masa a 
ew 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
me Vou. XVI, No. 51 OcToBER 15, 1937 
ful F.P.A. STUDENT MEMBERSHIP 
$1 Academic Year 60¢ Semester 
Student Membership includes the new Foreign Polic 
ted F Y 
rk, Bulletin, one Headline Book a semester, and special 
admission to meetings at National Headquarters and 
sar : the Branches. 
ual 7 
. 
Offered only to High School Students, and College Students 
OW. who are taking at least 10 credit hours a week. 
er- 
ROOSEVELT ABANDONS ISOLATION 
by } 
7  cmaegrond ROOSEVELT’S speech of October 5, | Power Treaty to consult with each other and addi- 
repudiating the isolationist philosophy embodied tional states having special interests in the Orient in 
= in the Neutrality Act, has created a world sensa- an effort to secure peaceful settlement. It recom- 
“tion. Whether it will assist in checking world mended that, meanwhile, the Assembly should not 
osi- | anarchy will depend on whether the speech was in- close its session; and League members were urged to 
ien- | tended merely as another “moral gesture” or will be “refrain from taking any action which might have 
vas ) backed by a positive foreign policy. the effect of weakening China’s power of resistance,” 
1. “The people of the United States,” the President said, and ie consider how far they — individually extend 
lew | must “give thought to the rest of the world. . . . The pres- aid to China. 
ent reign of terror and lawlessness . . . has now reached a On October 6 the League Assembly, with the sig- 
1 of | stage where the very foundations of civilization are seriously nificant abstention of Poland and Siam, adopted this 
mal 7 threatened. . . . Without a declaration of war and without report—again demonstrating the value of the League 
rob- | warning or justification of any kind, civilians, including Og te : 1d opini Lnenniliendl 
women and children, are being ruthlessly murdered with mechanism LOf FOCUSINg WOLKE OPIROn. Sa 
nd, } bombs from the air. In times of so-called peace, ships are the Aga Khan, president of the Assembly, invited 
"| being attacked and sunk by submarines without cause or the 17 League members who had signed or adhered 
sof | notice. Nations are fomenting and taking sides in civil to the Nine-Power Treaty to initiate the consultations 
ign | Warfare in nations that have never done them any harm. authorized by Article 7 of that Pact. The states thus 
If these aggressions and inhumanities increase, “let no one satel ticle i lia. Belgi Bolivie: Caaada 
imagine that America will escape, that it may expect mercy, ORES SCS ern om, ghee I acim 
——{ that this Western Hemisphere will not be attacked and that China, Denmark, France, India, Italy, Mexico, the 
-y,;| it will continue tranquilly and peacefully to carry on the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Swe- 
see ethics and arts of civilization. . . . The peace-loving nations den, Britain and the Union of South Africa. 
ages, | Must make a concerted effort in opposition to those viola- On the 6th, also, the State Department issued a 
tions of treaties and those ignorings of humane instincts : hi : 
ae which today are creating a state of international anarchy formal statement which, after referring ‘a te eg Pv 
rany, | and instability from which there is no escape to mere isola- adopted by the League, declared that in “the light 
n the | tion or neutrality.” of the unfolding developments in the Far East, the 
alto | While recognizing “the importance of removing injustices government of the United States has been forced to 
vhich | aNd well-founded grievances,” the sanctity of treaties and the conclusion that the action of Japan in China is 
‘= “eg of the rights of liberties of others must be restored. contrary to the provisions” of the Nine-Power 
other | But it seems “to be unfortunately true that the epidemic of ; 
sth | world lawlessness is spreading.” When an epidemic of Treaty and the Anti- ‘War Pact—a statement Sass 
ed. physical disease starts, the community joins in a “quaran- categorical than any issued by the State Department 
sv ¢ tine” of the patient. For the very reason that “America during the Manchuria crisis of 1931-1932. Mr. Hull 
“blic, ) ates war, ... there must be positive endeavors to preserve ended by stating that “the conclusions” of the United 
paremg Peace. States are “in general accord with those of the As- 
| Encouraged by this speech, the League’s Far East- sembly of the League of Nations.” Subsequently the 
seal ern Advisory Committee on the same day declared United States announced that it would accept an in- 
nattet 


that Japan had violated its treaty obligations by in- 
vading China and that the Assembly should invite 
League members who are signatories of the Nine- 





vitation to participate in the Nine-Power conference. 


Former Secretary of State Stimson, in a long letter 
to the New York Times on the 6th, condemned the 








— 





a 





Neutrality Act and intimated that the United States 
and Britain should boycott essential Japanese exports 
and imports; while Senator Key Pittman, chairman 
of the Committee on Foreign Relations, declared that 
an embargo against Japan would stop an invasion of 
China within thirty days, and advanced the startling 
doctrine that, as a result of the Supreme Court de- 
cision in the Curtiss-Wright case, the President al- 
ready has power to impose such a boycott. 

In the countries belonging to the democratic bloc, 
the President's speech was received with intense 
gratification tempered by skepticism, while the dic- 
tatorships expressed indignation. Although Prime 
Minister Neville Chamberlain termed the address a 
“clarion call,” British opinion asked whether the 
United States was willing to assume the risks involved 
in checking further aggressions in the Orient. China, 
too, was gratified by the President's speech, but in a 
radio broadcast of October 9 General Chiang Kai- 
shek declared “international sympathies, though a 
source of greatest encouragement, should not be per- 
mitted to awaken false or ill-grounded hopes.” 


In Japan the President's speech and, even more, 
Secretary Hull’s pronouncement that Japan in effect 
was the aggressor, at first aroused intense anger, and 
it was reported that Tokyo would refuse to recognize 
the existence of the Nine-Power Pact or to attend 
the proposed conference. On further reflection, how- 
ever, the Japanese Foreign Office issued a statement 
on October 9 merely expressing regret that the 
League and the United States had condemned Japan 
as a treaty violator and insisting that its action in 
China constituted legitimate self-defense. At the 
same time there were reports that Foreign Minister 
Hirota had informed the Cabinet that Japan would 
attend the Nine-Power Conference, “if. justly and 
lawfully called.” But, “to denounce Japan as an 
aggressor,” he added, “then invite her to attend the 
conference would not be just.” 

Until the European situation clears up, it is im- 
probable that the Nine-Power conference will do 
more than offer mediation to the two parties. In 
view of the present unwillingness of any great power 
to take the risks involved in full economic sanctions, 
Tokyo doubtless hopes that the conference will 
merely put pressure on Nanking to accept Japanese 
demands in North China as the price of stopping the 
war, thus leading to another Hoare-Laval deal. 

Meanwhile, the Neutrality Act continues to plague 
the State Department. Since this Act requires the 
imposition of an arms embargo against belligerents 
only on the existence of a “state of war’—as dis- 
tinguished from the outbreak of hostilities—the Presi- 
dent can legally justify his failure to apply the Act so 
far. But should Japan declare war, he would prob- 
ably have to impose the embargo on both parties— 
despite the doctrine of Presidential prerogative re- 


Page Two 








ee 
——y 


cently advanced by Senator Pittman. Even if the 
President invoked the cash-and-carry provisions of 
the law, it is believed, China would be far more seri. 
ously affected than Japan, which has undoubtedly 
accumulated large supplies both of munitions and 
raw materials. By contrast, it is estimated that Nan. | 
king has military supplies which can last only six 
months unless they are replenished by imports. Some 
arms are now reaching China via Hongkong and 
Mongolia without encountering the Japanese block. 
ade. But should these supplies be cut off, China 
might succumb and Japan would triumph over the 
President’s pronouncement. 

Under the principles enumerated in the President's 
speech, the United States should refrain from im. 
posing the Neutrality Act so long as this is legally 
possible. But assuming that an amendment of this! 
law is unlikely in the next few months, the remain. 
ing alternative is to prepare for a Japanese declara- 
tion of war by attempting to coordinate the provi- 
sions of the Neutrality Act with the action of the 
League powers, so as to produce an international 





shipping embargo proposed here several weeks ago.* 
It is only by fitting the Neutrality Act into a system} 
of international “quarantine” that the United States | 
can escape from becoming a virtual ally of Japan. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


DEMOCRACIES CAUGHT SHORT ON SPAIN 
In the fast poker game now being played by Eu- 


ropean chancelleries, Mussolini has once more called 
his opponents’ bluff. His answer to the Franco 
British note of October 2, delivered on October 9 
after considerable prodding by the British Ambassa- 
dor and the French chargé d'affaires in Rome, showed 
no signs of retreat from the stiffer position on Spain 
assumed on his return from Germany. The Fascist | 
government, after echoing the hope of the two 
democracies that “the internal struggles of Spain 
may cease to be a cause of suspicion and friction be 
tween other nations,” declined their invitation to 4 
three-power conference. It suggested, instead, that 
the vexing question of foreign volunteers in Spaia! 
should “continue to be dealt with” by the Lona 
Non-Intervention Committee, whose action, accord: 
ing to the Franco-British note, has been “ paralyzed’ 
by the difficulties of the situation; and stated that 
Italy will not participate in any conversations or com 
ferences to which Germany has not been formally 
invited. 

The Italian note coincided with reports that I 
Duce’s son, Bruno, accompanied by a crack squadron 
of 23 Italian bombers, had flown to Rebel territory 
for active service; that additional Italian troops ant | 
war material had been landed in Rebel ports; antl 


. 
7 


***American Policy in the Far East,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, August 2) 
1937. 


(Continued on Page 4) 








obs: 
velt 
not 
onl: 


nou 
ser 
cert 
wh: 
it £ 
tior 
stas 
fici: 
or 


rest 
cio 
visi 
imy 
pur 
the 


rev 
con 


De 
imy 
der 
ret: 
the 
tor 
act 
vin 
tio’ 
it, 

the 
W: 
Spe 
cat 
on 
an 
me 


Ae) 
hay 


an 
bu 


for 





nt’s 
im- 
ally 
this 


afa- 
OVi- 

the 
ynal 
20." 
tem 
‘ates 


co 
er 9 
assa- 
ywed 
pain 
LSCISt 
)pain 
n be 
to 4 


in | 


illed | 








spain 
ndos 
cord: 


that 
"COM 
nally 


at I 
rdron 
ritory 
s and 


gust 21, 





W ashington News Letter 

















, a 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 13—A Speech or a Program? The astute 
observation of the London Times that Mr. Roose- 
velt’s Chicago speech had voiced an “attitude” and 
not formulated a program is confirmed in part, but 
only in part, by developments of the past few days in 
Washington. Within 24 hours of the Chicago pro- 
nouncement, it became apparent to Washington ob- 
servers that the President’s clarion call for “con- 
certed action” to “quarantine” war did not mean 
what many Americans hoped, and others feared, 
it meant: immediate application of economic sanc- 
tions to curb Japanese aggression in Asia. At this 
stage of the game responsible State Department of- 
ficials are not thinking about boycotts or embargoes 
or any other kind of strong-arm action in the Far 
East. What they are thinking about is a program to 
restore peace, through mediation rather than coer- 
cion, within the framework of the consultation pro- 
visions of the Nine Power Treaty. That pact, it is 
important to remember, contains no provisions for 
punishing violators of its terms. At the same time, 
the official statement of October 6 associating the 
United States with the views of the League Assembly 
reveals a tentative program of cooperation in sharp 
contrast to the philosophy of rigid isolation. 

To evaluate the President’s speech and the State 
Department’s cautious condemnation of Japan, it is 
important to note that the groundwork for this new 
departure had been laid down in advance by Sec- 
retary Hull in a series of public statements beginning 
the middle of September. In his speech to the Na- 
tional Peace Conference on September 19, Mr. Hull 
actually launched a program of education to con- 
vince the American people of the futility of “isola- 
tionism,” or ‘“‘storm-cellarism’” as he sometimes calls 
it, and the need for a positive, but still middle-of- 
the-road, policy of cooperation to preserve peace. 
Washington observers are aware that the Chicago 
speech was primarily designed as a part of this edu- 
cational campaign. Obviously it was not tossed off 
on the spur of the moment, but was carefully planned 
and expertly timed to fit the necessities of the do- 
mestic as well as the international situation. 

The response from abroad is generally considered 
good here. Prime Minister Chamberlain, who is 
having his own troubles with Mussolini, has publicly 
and privately expressed his thanks to the President, 
but has advised Washington that Britain is not ready 
for any punitive measures in Asia. France, while 


perhaps reading too much into the Roosevelt speech, 
has welcomed the new turn in American policy for 
its ultimate if not immediate effect on Europe. Rome 
and Berlin, despite inspired press comments to the 


contrary, are disturbed by the spectre of a new front 
in the West. 


The American reaction. The domestic reaction, 
however, is of greater and more immediate concern 
to Washington. The first chorus of editorial ap- 
proval is discounted by experienced State Depart- 
ment officials who detect a strong undertone of criti- 
cism, based (erroneously, they believe) on the con- 
viction that Mr. Roosevelt is about to embark on a 
Wilsonian program to police the world. Already, 
newspaper polls are showing the strength of Con- 
gressional opposition to sanctions against aggressor 
nations, and popular support of stronger neutrality 
to keep the nation out of foreign wars. Now that the 
President has called a special session of Congress 
for November 15, he is quite likely to face an 
embarrassing debate on the whole basis of American 
foreign policy, with the lines drawn on the old issue 
of isolation vs. cooperation. This Mr. Roosevelt's 
closest advisers want to avoid at all cost, and they 
had privately urged him to abandon his special 
session. In line with this advice, the State Depart- 
ment is striving to combat the notion that the Chi- 
cago speech constituted a complete reversal of policy, 
and a negation of the principles laid down by Con- 
gress in the Neutrality Act. Thus, they explain, we 
are still adhering to Mr. Hull’s middle-of-the-road, 
and are not adventuring into new fields. For the 
next week or so, all statements emanating from the 
Department are likely to be quiet and reassuring. 


Next steps. If the moves of the past few days do 
not, in fact, point to a new road, what practical pro- 
gram has the Administration to offer to implement 
the call for positive action? The answer is found, 
in part, between the lines of the official statement 
of October 6. In this document State Department 
draftsmen were careful not to slam the door on 
Japan. They avoided use of the word “aggressor” 
and contented themselves with merely stating that 
Japan’s action in China “is contrary to the provisions 
of the Nine-Power Treaty’’ and the Kellogg Pact. 
The League likewise has kept the door open to 
mediation, urging the members of the Nine-Power 
Pact to “seek a method of putting an end to the con- 
flict by agreement.” With this pacific purpose, the 
State Department is in complete accord. The United 











ee 








States will accept the invitation to sit with the other 
Signatories and adherents of the Nine-Power Pact, 
but will not take the lead in a drive to impose pen- 
alties which raise the dangerous question of retalia- 
tion. The chances of mediation may be almost nil, 
but in the Washington view they are worth trying, 
and they will be tried for a time at least. If there 
is any element in Japan which has the intelligence 
to propose a peace settlement, there are people here 
who would help it find a face-saving formula for 
retreat. That may even be a Hoare-Laval deal. If 
it fails, no one can predict the next step. 

During these past few weeks Washington ob- 
servers have detected a new atmosphere in the State 
Department. For the first time since the war, the 
Department is taking on the character of a Foreign 
Office—a real Foreign Office dealing with real prob- 
lems. In the past, there has always been an air of 
unreality, a pleasant complacency, as though we lived 
in a quaint Alice-in-Wonderland world. But those 
days are gone, and the hard world of reality seems 
to have broken through. We are in the game of 
Power Politics. From now on, whether we like it or 
not, we will be compelled to play the game. The 
American people have an important stake in whether 
it is played well, or badly. 





DEMOCRACIES CAUGHT SHORT ON SPAIN 
(Continued from Page 2) 

that General Franco, who on October 4 had received 
Mussolini’s “most fervent wishes” for the triumph 
of the Rebel cause, was preparing to launch a de- 
cisive drive on the basis of a plan drafted by Marshal 
Badoglio, hero of the Ethiopian campaign. Simul- 
taneously, Virginio Gayda, Fascist spokesman on 
foreign affairs, charged that France and the Soviet 
Union were shipping war material to Valencia, and 
it was announced that 50,000 Italian troops had 
been sent to reinforce the garrisons of Libya “owing 
to necessities of an international character.” 

Italy's intensified intervention in Spain and its 
refusal to negotiate directly regarding withdrawal 
of foreign “volunteers” confront France and Britain 
with grave decisions. Only last week France seemed 
determined, in case of Italian refusal, to open its 
Pyrenees frontier which, according to neutral ob- 
servers, has been strictly closed to men and arms 
destined for either side in Spain. On October 7, 
however, Premier Chautemps told the American 
Club in Paris that France “rejects any war of ide- 
ology from whichever side it may come,” and For- 
eign Minister Delbos, while declaring on October 9 
“we must act,” added that “as far as France is con- 


Page Four 








ee 
et 


cerned, there is no question of preference for ide. 
ology of any sort.” It would appear that the Chay. 
temps government, although strengthened by the 
cantonal elections of October 10, which showed no 
decline in the influence of the Popular Front, intends 
to steer a middle course and avoid precipitate action, 

The guarded character of Franco-British negotia. 
tions on Spain makes it difficult to learn the extent 
to which French policy is determined by the views 
of Prime Minister Chamberlain, who believes that 
Spain is not worth the bones of a single British 
soldier. On October 8, when the main outlines of 
the Italian reply had already been foreshadowed by 
the Fascist press, Mr. Chamberlain, addressing the | 
Conservative party conference at Scarborough, ex. 
pressed the hope that this reply “may prove to be 
of such a character as will bring us all into greater 
harmony,” and open the way for a general Anglo. 
Italian settlement. 

From the point of view of the Spanish Loyalists, 
the withdrawal of Italian troops—which probably 
could not be effected without threat of force—is far | 
less urgent than the opening of the Franco-Spanish 
frontier. The Loyalists have plenty of men and, in 
fifteen months of strenuous fighting, have ac 
quired the discipline and organization woefully lack- 
ing in the early days of the civil war. What theg| 
need is not foreign volunteers but arms, for which 
they are in a position to pay. Yet the French gov- 
ernment apparently fears that re-opening of the 
frontier would bring on that collision between for-| 
eign powers on Spanish soi! which the finespun non- 
intervention procedure has sought to avoid. It is 
reluctant, moreover, to antagonize Franco, on the 
theory that if the General wins he will bite the 
Fascist hands that fed him, and turn to France and 
Britain for financial assistance. The Western de 
mocracies apparently believe that Italy is dissipating 
its military and economic resources by far-flung ex- 
peditions, and prefer to let the Spanish fire burn 
itself out rather than risk the danger of general con- 
flagration by trying to quench it. The Spanish crisis 
—like that in the Far East—shows that resistance 
to aggression which comes not before the coup but 
after the aggressor has already acquired a vested 
interest in his venture, is apt to prove futile, unless 
the protesting nations are ready to back up theif 
protests by the threat of force. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 








The Spirit and Structure of German Fascism, by Robert 
A. Brady. New York, Viking, 1937. $3.00 

Although good in some respects, this book suffers from 
an oversimplified Marxist interpretation. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 51, Ocroper 15, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationél 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lasiig Busi, President; Vera MicHELes DEAN, Editer. Entered as second-class mattel 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


‘FC 


Ai 


Oct 


Y 


Fra 
voli 
alyz 
Lor 
pro 
fact 
pre: 
don 

la 
bell 
syst 
by . 
nav 
non 
hov 
pla 
teet 
by ( 
tair 
Ital 
for 
for 
mer 
tior 
cou 
lea’ 
mai 
ret. 
wh 
offe 
tro 
sol: 


] 
nor 
Lor 


on 











