


FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


























Entered as second- 
r class matter December 
Ne AX 2, 1921, ac the Post 
. , a Office at New York, 
e rv) N. Y., under the act 
) of March 3, 1879. 
2 2 rT ° 
Peri lic 1 MAVASLUAY 
T {hye o> Raa ee 
Liorary Va YVONErESS, 
Wa .t 2 
. t . D. Se 











NEUTRALITY 





ICS. Research Sta 
1en Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
the FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
on, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
rgo VoL. XV, No. 17 FEBRUARY 21, 1936 
hed 
igh THE NEW AMERICAN NEUTRALITY 
be- . by Raymond Leslie Buell 
er The pros and cons of the new “neutrality”; the Neutrality 
Act of August 24, 1935; the administration and “isolationist” 

: al ; bills now pending before Congress. 
“ye Can the United States remain neutral? 
ght January 16 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25c. 
oro- 
1 of 
ver, fl RETREAT FROM 
sk,” FF 
‘ure & TS difficulties inherent in any real effort to 
t be & isolate this country have been revealed by 
the f) three developments of the past few days: 
| be > 1. Bya vote of 204 to 36 the House of Represen- 
the ) tatives on February 14 appropriated $376,000,000 
the ) for the army, the largest appropriation ever made 
ring r this purpose in peace time. This bill provides 
th a B® for an increase from 118,000 to 150,000 in the 
con-F§ regular army, and an increase of 5,000 in the 
rove F} national guard; the procurement of 565 airplanes; 

ind an expenditure of $8,500,000 for seacoast de- 
1 by | fense projects. It seems probable that Congress 


nili- FH} will vote nearly $600,000,000 for the navy, bring- 
Ver- ing total military appropriations to about a billion 
ands dollars for the coming year—as compared with 
hich } $540,000,000 in 1934. Despite a widespread de- 
rged=} mand for balancing of the budget, no business 


crease in our military and naval establishment is 
‘ifist, |} necessary to defend the continental United States 


con- organization appears to have protested against 
col-F} these military expenditures, which will absorb 

nno}® about a quarter of the regular budget. Yet it 

nl cannot be seriously contended that such an in- 
en 


ry 5 : from invasion. Congress apparently wishes to be 
1mon §§ in a position to defend this country’s “interests” 
d ac- : far beyond our borders. It is infected with the 


binet }} world-wide desire for bigger and better arma- 
t the} ments. 


(Con-)) 2. The belief of influential political leaders that 
Boca ) armaments may be legitimately employed for 
ve )) Purposes other than continental defense was indi- 
full cated in a prepared statement read to the Senate 
wil } on February 10 by Key Pittman, chairman of the 
Po 4 Foreign Relations Committee. He asserted that 


“it is high time that Congress take cognizance of the 
AN ! Japanese policy with regard to China and its intended 
effect upon the United States...” He denied any simi- 
larity between the American Monroe Doctrine and 





Nationa! Japanese policy in Asia; for under the Monroe Doctrine 
Editor. “we did not arrogate to ourselves the right of conquest 
ir. x or domination in the Americas.” The real Monroe 


Doctrine for China, he said, is embodied in the Nine- 








Power treaty which Japan has “challenged absolutely” 
and which the signatories generally have apparently 
“ignored.” Mr. Pittman declared that Vice Admiral 
Sankichi Takahashi, commander-in-chief of the Japanese 
fleet, had in effect recently told the United States to 
“abandon our naval policy, refrain from expanding our 
commerce with China, and cease the protection of our 
foreign commerce”; otherwise, Japan would extend 
the cruising radius of its navy to New Guinea and 
Borneo, and fortify Formosa and the mandated South 
Sea islands. According to the Senator, “never in the 
history of modern times has such an undiplomatic, 
arrogant, and impertinent statement been volunteered 
by one holding such a position . . . Congress will not be 
bulldozed into the abandonment of our national defense, 
the protection of our legitimate trade, or our commerce 
with China....” The United States “does not intend to 
surrender the freedom of the seas.” Japan has closed 
the door to American business in Manchuria in viola- 
tion of treaty rights. “We have a right to worry about 
the violation of peace treaties.” If such treaties cannot 
be respected, then “there is only one answer, and that 
is dominating naval and air forces. .. .” 


3. In view of this statement, which repudiates 
the fundamental assumptions of the permanent 
neutrality proposals, it is not surprising that 
Senator Pittman should announce on February 11 
that the effort to enact such proposals had been 
abandoned for this session, and that instead an 
attempt would be made merely to secure extension 
of the present neutrality resolution until May 1, 
1937, subject to an amendment prohibiting loans 
and credits to belligerents. On February 16 the 
House passed the resolution by a vote of 353 to 27. 
The reason advanced in some quarters for aban- 
donment of the permanent program was that iso- 
lationist Senators, such as Hiram Johnson, threat- 
ened a filibuster, which might postpone the desired 
adjournment of Congress until after May 1. 


Since the Neutrality Resolution of August 31, 
1935 does not, under the present interpretation, 
give the President the right to impose an embargo 
on raw materials, Italy may evade the conse- 
quences of a League embargo by increasing its 
purchases from the United States. Crude oil ex- 
































































sceesdiieiiesieeninambaniamdndan 





ports from the United States to Italian Africa 
showed an increase of 600 per cent in November 
1935 over November 1934; while exports of gaso- 
line to Italy during December 1935 showed a 100 
per cent increase over the previous month. 
Despite these increases, a League expert com- 
mittee reported on February 12 that Italy had oil 
reserves which would last only three and a half 
months in the event of a League embargo, pro- 
vided the United States held down its exports to 
“pre-war” levels. Congress, however, appears 
unwilling to place any restrictions on oil exports. 
Its attitude might possibly have been different 
had the League acted more promptly with regard 
to its embargo. At the same time, the almost hys- 
terical demand for the “new neutrality’ which 
swept this country a few months ago seems to be 
evaporating even more quickly than its severest 
critics anticipated. It still remains possible for 
League states to stop American oil shipments 
by establishing a blockade of Italy, but such 
an extreme course involves the risk of war with 
Mussolini and serious disagreements with the 
United States. League members have already 
indicated that they might hold this country 
responsible for continuation of the Ethiopian war 
and frustration of the League sanctions. 


The United States and Collective Security 


A group of thirteen Senators, led by Senator 
Nye, made a last-minute fight for wider neutrality 
legislation; on February 18, however, the Senate 
by a vote of 61 to 16 rejected their amendment to 
the Pittman resolution. One may sympathize with 
the aim of the Nye group to stop the development 
of profits which may involve the United States in 
war, just as one may sympathize with the desire 
of Senator Pittman that treaty rights be re- 
spected. But both groups are likely to fail in 
achieving their objective, because they stubbornly 
refuse to think in terms of international organiza- 
tion and collective security. Recent debates have 
demonstrated that neither Congress nor the Ad- 
ministration is willing to surrender foreign trade, 
the freedom of the seas, or American treaty rights 
in other parts of the world—a surrender implicit 
in the effort to build a Chinese wall around this 
country. On the contrary, the government is 
building up a powerful military, air and naval 
force which Senator Pittman frankly states may 
be employed to make Japan respect treaty rights. 
Obviously, any such course involves the grave 
danger of hostilities, the outcome of which cannot 
be accurately predicted. This danger could be 
averted and the legitimate international interests 
of the United States safeguarded if this govern- 


= Page Two 





——e 





ment would associate itself in collective efforts to 
mediate disputes when they arise and, if neces. 
sary, take concerted measures of economic non- 
intercourse against any state deemed by us to be 
an aggressor. 
collective security does not mean that the United 
States should join the League of Nations—a pos. 
sibility which few Europeans envisage. But it 
does mean that the United States should join with 
other powers in accepting measures of consulta- 
tion and economic action for the purpose of mak- 
ing the anti-war pact a reality. 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


FRENCH GOVERNMENT DISBANDS 
ROYALISTS 


The Sarraut government, which with the aid of 
the Socialists obtained a sizable vote of confidence 
in the Chamber of Deputies on January 31, met 
and survived another test last week. The political 
quiet which had prevailed on the surface of French 


The adoption of the principle off 


PRE SRRRSp RAT EIR! Te 





politics was suddenly broken on February 13, when f 


a group of the royalist Camelots du Roi attacked 
and severely injured the Socialist leader Léon 
Blum as the latter, in an automobile, attempted 


to pass the funeral procession of the royalist his-f 
The cabinet, on learn-F 


torian Jacques Bainville. 
ing of the attack, was compelled to take immedi- 
ate and drastic counter-measures. 
the law, passed last December, which authorizes 
the government to dissolve anti-Republican and 


semi-military political organizations, the cabinet} 
decreed the dissolution of the royalist party) 
known as the Action Francaise and its subsidiary) 
groups, the Camelots du Roi and a student group.) 
At the same time it decided to bring action against} 
the publicist, Charles Maurras, for incitement) 


to murder in the royalist organ, Action Francaise 


It is doubtful that the attack on M. Blum 
presages a renewal of political disturbances. 


out the campaign leading up to the parliamentary 
elections early in May, the so-called Fascist or- 


ganizations of the Right have been put on the} 


defensive. If the Right needed any demonstra- 


tion of the strength and unity of the Left, it was) 


provided by the 200,000 people who participated 
on February 14 in a huge parade staged under the 


auspices of the Popular Front in protest against} 
the assault on Léon Blum, the symbol of anti-) 


fascism. Moreover, such organizations as the 
Croix de Feu realize that the government will be 
compelled to dissolve them also if they provoke 
serious disturbances. JouHn C. DEWILDE 


Acting underf 


ALE 
though political tension is likely to persist through-f 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 17, Fepruary 21, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. Nationa 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiig Busit, President; EstHer G. Ocpen, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


— ant oat oe ew oe oe 6A 











oe | 


» eo 2S Ga 


n 


