a 
—$———____ 


r the 
» two 
reful 
e be- 
e out 


» won 
oard. 
been 
ender 
ritish 
1 the 
d be- 
last 
n on 
eting 
vhich 
olicy 
ynger 
ainst 
hine- 
ques- 
rman 


yr Lo- 
con- 
rrive 
rma- 
vern- 
natic 
ation 
orted 
»mier 
od to 
prob- 
lean- 
‘itain 
rress. 
ok to 
“dl by 
r the 
ritish 
itary 


situa- 
rted, 
» into 
peace 
fated 
<tend 
Ger- 
ite in 
f the 
a are 
sDE 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Entered as second 
class matter December 

1921, at the Post 
, ; Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


VoL. XV, No. 42 


AucustT 14, 1936 


STRUGGLE OF THE POWERS IN CHINA 
By T. A. Bisson 


This report summarizes the salient features of the 
struggle for supremacy in China, and discusses the pos- 
sibilities that may yet check the drift toward war in the 
Far East. 


August 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


al Division, 
of Congress, 


hineton, D. ©. 


POWERS MOVE TOWARD NEUTRALITY ACCORD IN SPAIN 


ONTINUED efforts to prevent the civil war 
in Spain from becoming an _ international 
conflict met with partial success this week as the 
principal European powers gave their qualified 
approval to the non-intervention project spon- 
sored by the French government and warmly sup- 
ported by Great Britain. Cause for anxiety is not 
reduced, however, by the conditions attached by 
those governments most directly interested in the 
outcome of events in Spain. Italy, while accept- 
ing in principle, indicates that it will not be con- 
tent with a loose pact of non-intervention, but will 
ask for a precise agreement of neutrality, which. 
would have the effect of giving the rebels the legal 
status of belligerents. Mussolini, moreover, wants 
full particulars on the measures proposed to curb 
public manifestations, press campaigns, subscrip- 
tions of money and the activities of private citi- 
zens. Germany, approached at the suggestion of 
Britain, demands that the Soviet Union accept 
the same conditions as others and suppress all un- 
official aid to the Spanish government. Russia, in 
turn, insists that “certain states’ (meaning Ger- 
many and Italy) must halt all assistance given to 
the rebels, and that Portugal must be included in 
the pact. 


In the presence of these exacting conditions, 
Premier Blum’s Popular Front government faces 
a formidable task in converting “acceptance in 
principle” into an effective accord. Nor is the 
task rendered easier by the sympathy of many 
of M. Blum’s own followers with the Spanish 
loyalists, or by the activities of other countries. 
As the Quai d’Orsay pressed its negotiations 
French volunteers streamed across the border into 
Spain to enlist against the Spanish rebels. On 
August 7 the Nazi government lodged a formal 
and emphatic protest against the alleged assas- 
sination of four German citizens in Barcelona and 
demanded reparation from the Spanish govern- 
ment. The following day Italy presented a sim- 


ilar protest against the killing of two Italian sub- 
jects. Great Britain, despite its support of the 
neutrality project, ordered British warships on 
August 10 to patrol the Straits of Gibraltar to 
enforce a decree forbidding further fighting by 
either faction. 

These developments, coupled with the replies 
to the French proposals, demonstrate only too 
clearly the extent to which the vital interests of 
other states are involved in the outcome of the 
civil strife in Spain. Neutrality itself has become 
an issue between two groups of states, one of 
which seeks to support the Spanish government 
and hence the cause of socialism or communism, 
while the other seeks to support the rebels as the 
vanguard of fascism. WILLIAM T. STONE 


THE FRENCH NEW DEAL 


The French Parliament elected on April 26 and 
May 3 of this year is approaching the end of its 
first session after having passed a series of legis- 
lative measures almost unprecedented in its his- 
tory. Under the vigorous leadership of the Popu- 
lar Front government constituted by Léon Blum 
on June 5, Parliament has worked rapidly and 
efficiently. The cabinet has thus secured the adop- 
tion of a large part of its program designed to ac- 
complish economic and social reforms and stimu- 
late economic activity. 

Pressed by widespread “stay-in” strikes which 
in all involved over two million workers, the gov- 
ernment quickly put through Parliament legis- 
lation establishing a 40-hour week in industry, 
providing for paid holidays and guaranteeing the 
workers collective labor contracts. These mea- 
sures, as well as a general wage increase from 7 
to 15 per cent, had already been accepted by em- 
ployers in a strike agreement concluded with the 
General Confederation of Labor on June 7. With 
the exception of a few minor strikes, industrial 
peace has been completely restored. 


In order to bring about the revalorization of 
agricultural products, the government has obtained 
the approval of a law setting up a wheat monopoly 
which is to be the forerunner of similar schemes 
covering wine, milk and meat. The monopoly will 
be directed by a central council representing the 
interests of farmers, dealers, millers, bakers and 
consumers. It will fix the prices of wheat, flour 
and bread. Its task is to regulate the marketing 
of the crop and dispose of eventual surpluses. For 
this purpose, it will also monopolize completely 
all import and export trade in wheat. The farm- 
ers are expected to be aided further by a bill still 
pending in Parliament which provides for a two- 
year moratorium on mortgage payments. 

Little relief has so far been accorded to employ- 
ers, whose labor costs have risen about 35 per 
cent as the result of wage increases and the new 
legislation. Small business concerns without large 
reserves or credit resources find it particularly 
hard to bear this burden. As a concession to the 
latter, the Chamber recently passed a law accord- 
ing them a virtual moratorium until December 31 
on rent payments and promissory notes given in 
payment of business obligations. In addition, leg- 
islation still pending offers all employers cheap, 
government-guaranteed credits from the Bank of 
France for sums equivalent to increased wage 
costs during the next six months. 


Assistance to industry has been accorded only 
temporarily until the government’s program of 
increasing purchasing power becomes effective. 
As part of this program, the government has in- 
troduced a public works plan, still awaiting the 
Senate’s approval, which contemplates the expen- 
diture of 20 billion francs over four years, to be 
financed by medium- and short-term loans. This 
year projects entailing an ultimate outlay of 4 bil- 
lion will be begun or finished, but only one billion 
will actually be disbursed. 


Since the French New Deal, like its American 
prototvpe, is based on credit inflation and large- 
scale government expenditure, it was inevitable 
from the very beginning that the statute of the 
conservatively administered Bank of France 
would be modified. Hitherto the Bank has been 
largely controlled by a Council of Regents elected 
by the 200 largest stockholders who, in turn, rep- 
resented the industrial and financial oligarchy of 
France. Under the terms of legislation adopted 
by both houses of Parliament, government offi- 
cials, either ex-officio or appointed, will hold 12 
of the 23 seats on the Bank’s governing body. 
Only two members and three censors with a con- 
sultative voice will be elected by an assembly in- 


Page Two 


cluding all the stockholders. The other members 
will be named by the government on the proposal! 
of various corporate economic groups representing 
industry, commerce, agriculture and consumers. 
It remains to be seen whether the complete contro] 
thus acquired by the government over the Bank 
will be abused in the future. 

The financial problem—most difficult of all the 
issues confronting the government—is still un- 
solved. The sizeable budget deficit already evi- 
dent on its advent to power will be greatly in- 
creased by the mass of new legislation. The bill 
enabling the government to nationalize concerns 
manufacturing arms and ammunition and the law 
restoring salary and pension cuts to low-paid civil 
servants and war veterans will further burden the 
Treasury. The latter will probably need to bor- 
row about 18 billion francs before the end of the 
year. In a convention concluded with the govern- 
ment on June 18, the Bank of France agreed to 
convert into temporary non-interest-bearing ad- 
vances Treasury notes and other securities up to 
14 billion francs discounted by it during 1935 and 
1936. In addition, it undertook to extend a fur- 
ther credit of 10 billion francs. The government 
has hoped to dispense with this credit through the 
issue of a popular loan, but up to the present only 
a little more than 2 billion francs has been sub- 
scribed. Other resources will therefore have to 
be found. The advance of 3 billion francs ob- 
tained from London banks in May was renewed 
for three more months last week, but it must be 
repaid in November. 


There are other indications that the troubles of 
the government have only begun and are likely to 
become really acute in the fall. Although launch- 
ing France on an inflationary economic program 
which will inevitably increase the disparity be- 
tween domestic and foreign prices, the cabinet has 
refused to contemplate devaluation of the franc. 
In the end, however, it will probably have to de- 
value the currency or follow the German policy 
of exchange control, export subsidies and eco- 
nomic isolation. Up to the present, the govern- 
ment has also had to contend with little or no op- 
position. Employers, intimidated by the strikes, 
tamely submitted to the new legislation and wage 
increases, while the Fascist leagues, including the 
Croix de Feu, made no resistance to dissolution. 
During the coming months, however, the opposi- 
tion will have an opportunity to reorganize and 
collect its forces. In the autumn the government 
must therefore face problems which will severely 
test its ingenuity and strength. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 42, Aucust 14, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lgsiis BUELL, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DzAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


