eS, 
ced 


ind 


ire, 
ved 
has 


of 
the 
ale 
In- 


Ito- 
col- 
ork 
on- 
res, 
dy- 
an 


ans 


llen 
50 

ions 
his- 
the 


ional 
litor. 


‘ S BRAL Lia 4 i 
UNIV. OF MICti. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 22 Marcu 24, 1939 


-_ 





Defending America 
by Major George Fielding Eliot 


What is “‘adequate” defense? Is the Western Hemisphere in 
danger of attack? What are the armed forces necessary for 
continental defense? Here, at last, is a concise, lucid and 
balanced account of our problem of national defense, written 
by a military expert in language the layman can understand. 


World Affairs Pamphlets, No. 4 25 cents a copy 


(F.P.A. membership covers this series) 


ec 


NV 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 











———— 


HITLER STRIKES OUT FOR PAN-GERMAN EUROPE 








FOR the third time in little more than a year 
Hitler has advanced the frontiers of the Ger- 
man Reich. After intervening in favor of the “‘in- 
dependence’ of Slovakia, which was proclaimed by 
the Slovak Diet on March 14, the German Chan- 
cellor summoned the Czech President, Dr. Emil 
Hacha, to Berlin and compelled him, under threat 
of invasion, to lay “the fate of the Czech people 
and country in the hands of the Fuehrer of the Ger- 
man Reich.” That same day—March 15—German 
troops, closely followed by Hitler, began to roll into 
Czechoslovakia, occupying and garrisoning all im- 
portant cities. With the army came the dreaded 
Gestapo to mop up “undesirable” elements. Simul- 
taneously an orderly, but none the less thorough, 
campaign for the “Aryanization” of Czech business, 
professional and cultural life was launched. On 
March 16 a decree formally added Bohemia and 
Moravia to the German Reich and conferred upon 
these territories the status of a German protectorate. 
Two days later Baron Konstantin von Neurath, ex- 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, was named Reich Pro- 
tector in the newly acquired regions. Meanwhile, on 
March 16, Hitler accepted the “invitation’’ of the 
Slovak Premier, Dr. Tiso, to take Slovakia under his 
“protection,” and Hungary, relying on the support 
of the Reich, invaded and conquered Ruthenia. 
Although the “‘stubborn”’ refusal of Prague to obey 
all orders from Berlin was probably the immedi- 
ate cause of Hitler's sudden coup, the economic situ- 
ation in the Reich was undoubtedly a motivating 
factor. A persistently unfavorable trade balance 
threatened to drain Germany of all its remaining 
foreign assets and jeopardize its supply of raw ma- 
terials and foodstuffs. Its feverish armament pro- 
gram was overtaxing its iron and steel plants and 
arms factories. Through the seizure of Bohemia and 
Moravia the German government, according to Ber- 


lin sources, has now come into possession of gold 
and foreign exchange amounting to 500 million 
marks. Enormous Czech arms factories at Pilsen and 
Briinn will enable the Reich to step up its war prep- 
arations. Airplane plants, an important heavy indus- 
try, and Czech army stocks have also fallen into the 
Reich’s hands without firing a shot. 

While the seizure of most of Czechoslovakia is 
unquestionably of immediate benefit to Germany, the 
natural riches of the country should not be overesti- 
mated. They will not appease Hitler's appetite for 
more “room” for his people. The country produces 
a surplus of rye, oats, barley, potatoes and sugar 
but, like the Reich, has a deficit in corn and fats. It 
is poor in mineral resources, lacking sufficient coal 
and iron ore and possessing almost no petroleum. 
Yet, like Austria, the new protectorates of the Ger- 
man Reich constitute another step toward the crea- 
tion of the Nazi ideal of a Grossraumwirtschaft, a 
regional economy comprising all of central and east- 
ern Europe. While the realization of this ideal, no 
longer remote, would not make Germany self-suffi- 
cient, it would yield the German Empire enough 
food, copper, bauxite, oil and lumber, and partially 
cover its requirements in other raw materials. 

Now that Hitler has made himself undisputed 
master of Bohemia, the outlines of his conception of 
the new Europe are beginning to emerge. It will be a 
Pan-German Europe, probably including the Baltic 
countries, Poland, Hungary and the Balkans. With- 
in this greater unit the constituent countries will have 
varying degrees of “autonomy” or “independence,” 
according to their strength and geographic relation 
to Germany. 

As integral parts of the Reich and its monetary 
and customs régime, Bohemia and Moravia will en- 
joy little autonomy beyond the right to have their 
own schools, use their own language, and be ad- 





| 
i 
| 


wT es 








—_—_—_—— 





ministered in part by their own officials. Even these 
cultural rights will presumably be narrowly circum- 
scribed. Germans within Bohemia and Moravia have 
been declared German citizens; other inhabitants 
have been made subjects of the protectorate. This 
territory will have its own government, whose mem- 
bers and decisions may be vetoed by the German 
Fuehrer or his representative, the Reich Protector. 
The exact status of Slovakia has not yet been de- 
fined, but at least its foreign relations and defense 
will be taken over by Berlin. Hungary, although 
supported by Germany in the conquest of Ruthenia, 
may before long sink to a status resembling that of 
Slovakia. 


The remaining states in this German combination 
will probably be permitted to retain nominal inde- 
pendence, provided they abstain from policies inimi- 
cal to Germany and cooperate completely with the 
Reich in the creation of its Grossraumwirtschaft and 
the extension of its racial doctrines. The German 
government has already been pressing Rumania to 
sell the Reich all its exports of foodstuffs, oil and 
lumber. Similar “suggestions” were made some 
months ago to Lithuania and Bulgaria. Under ex- 
isting circumstances, these countries have no alterna- 
tive but to yield sooner or later to this pressure. 


Page Two 





—— 
— 


Poland, too, will have to abandon the “‘fence’’ and 
fall completely in step with Germany. Otherwise, it 
may find itself victim of another partition. Although 
the Western powers may be able to hold the western 
front, they can hardly check Hitler in central and 
eastern Europe. 

In establishing this domination over Europe Hitler 
has become the chief beneficiary of the Wilsonian 
doctrine of national self-determination. The appli- 
cation of this principle after the war created many 
small states unable to resist the German advance 
once Germany again became a strong power. Where 
the doctrine was imperfectly applied, Hitler has fre- 
quently constituted himself its champion, utilizing 
it to annex Austria and disrupt Czechoslovakia. To- 
day he can, if necessary, support the claims of the 
Croats in Yugoslavia, the Hungarians in Rumania 
and the Memel Germans in Lithuania. Yet some day 
the principle of self-determination of nations may 
prove a boomerang for the new German Reich, as 
it was for the pre-war Austro-Hungarian Empire. 
The nationalities of Eastern Europe have all tasted 
of independence and freedom. Their nationalism is 
vigorous and will not easily be suppressed, even by 
the ruthless and efficient German. 

JOHN C. DEWILDE 





EUROPE’S HOUR OF DECISION 


The establishment of a German “protectorate” 
over Czecho-Slovakia, and the general expectation 
that Hitler will proceed with his program of expan- 
sion, have once more confronted the Western powers 
with the choice they postponed at Munich. 

Gone now are the false assumptions that Hitler 
would be satisfied with the annexation of German- 
speaking regions, already overpopulated and highly 
industrialized. Gone is the hope that, by diverting 
Nazi Germany to the east where it would clash with 
the U.S.S.R., France and Britain might preserve their 
territories in Europe and their possessions overseas. 
Gone is the illusion that peace and security are divis- 
ible. Hitler's bloodless victory, disastrous as it was 
for the Czechs and Slovaks, has at least revealed his 
policy with inescapable clarity. It has also raised 
numberless questions, of which the following are 
the most pressing: 


1. Does Hitler’s drive to the east increase the 
danger of general war? To talk as if there were still 
a choice between war and peace is misleading. A 
world struggle for control of markets and raw ma- 
terials has been going on for decades, punctuated 
now and then—as in 1914-1918—by the outbreak of 
armed conflicts. Such an armed conflict may even 
now be avoided in Eastern Europe, where disruptive 
nationalism and social revolution are playing di- 
rectly into Hitler's hands. Ukrainians in Poland, 


Hungarians in Rumania (who might be promised to 
Budapest as a reward for collaboration with the 
Third Reich), Croats in Yugoslavia, Bulgarians in 
Greece, discontented peasants and lower middle- 
class elements throughout Eastern Europe are, con- 
sciously or unconsciously, Hitler’s strongest allies. 
Diplomatic maneuvres, and even economic conces- 
sions, by the Western powers will prove fruitless to 
check this drift into Germany's orbit, unless France 
and Britain decide to fight Hitler. In such a case, it 
is yet possible that Poland, Rumania and Yugoslavia, 
terrified by the German advance, might go over to 
the side of the World War allies. 


2. Will the Western powers resist Hitler in 
Eastern Europe? Hitler's coup in Czecho-Slovakia 
brought severe condemnation from France, Britain, 
the Soviet Union and the United States; the recall of 
French and British Ambassadors from Berlin; at- 
tempts by London to consult Washington and Mos- 
cow; and acceleration of rearmament everywhere. 
Moral condemnation serves as a useful safety-valve 
for popular indignation against Germany. Its only 
tangible effect on Hitler, however, is to speed up the 
process of expansion. The Western powers failed to 
take a stand against Hitler on behalf of Czecho- 
Slovakia, whose defense could have been justified on 
the ground not only of its military value but of its 
devotion to democratic institutions; it is difficult to 











Wl 


nd 

it 
gh 
mn 


nd 


ler 


1ce 


ria, 


lve 


the 
to 
ho- 


1ts 
to 








—_—_ 
—_—_-_ 





see why they would now defend the Polish and Ru- 
manian dictatorships—except for two reasons. Few 
British economic interests were involved in Czecho- 
Slovakia, while one-third of Rumania’s oil resources 
are controlled by British concerns. And, what is 
equally important, the farther Hitler presses into 
Rumania and eastward to the Persian Gulf, the more 
directly he menaces the British sphere of influence in 
the eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East. 
Here, for the first time since the beginning of Hit- 
ler's expansion, it is to Britain’s immediate self- 
interest to resist Germany. That is why Britain—to 
a much greater extent than France, whose interests 
have been almost entirely concentrated in the west- 
ern Mediterranean—is hastily summoning Poland, 
Rumania and the Soviet Union to form a new line of 
defense against Hitler’s eastward drive. 


3. What will the Soviet Union do now? It is 
perfectly understandable that the U.S.S.R., ostenta- 
tiously cold-shouldered at Munich, should now dis- 
play similar indifference regarding the fate of the 
Western powers. nor is it outside the realm of pos- 
sibility that Germany and the Soviet Union might 
yet reach a settlement at the expense of the British 
Empire, accompanied by a new partition of Poland 
and return to the U.S.S.R. of Bessarabia, appropri- 
ated by Rumania in 1918. Even if the Soviet Union is 
ready to collaborate with Britain and France, anti- 
communist feeling in Poland, Rumania and Yugo- 
slavia, which fear communism more than Nazism, 
may prove an insuperable obstacle. One thing is cer- 
tain: the Soviet decision will be based on a realistic 
estimate of the plight of the capitalist democracies. 


4. Is war to be expected in the west? The pros- 
pects of armed conflict in the west are more tangible 
than in the east. Italy still awaits payment for ser- 
vices rendered at Munich, and may try to acquire, 


Page Three 











by force, the French possessions it “unofficially” de- 
mands—notably Tunisia and French Somaliland. It 
is possible, however, that Mussolini, taking a leaf 
out of Hitler’s book, might persuade Britain that 
“self-determination” for Tunisia would bring ap- 
peasement, and maneuvre the British into accepting 
another Munich. Italy's support, as in 1914, will go 
to the highest bidder. The danger is that France may 
bid, pay, and then find that Italy is unwilling or un- 
able to deliver the goods. 


5. Should the Western powers fight Hitler? The 
Western powers have now been placed by Hitler in 
a position where, if they use force, they will have to 
launch a war of offense against Germany—unless, of 
course, such a general war is precipitated by outright 
Italian attack on French possessions. A war of of- 
fense could no longer be fought on ideological 
grounds—since the Western powers did nothing to 
support democratic forces in Spain, China or Czecho- 
Slovakia and, on the contrary, weakened them at 
every turn—but for the undisguised purpose of de- 
fending colonial territories acquired by methods es- 
sentially not different from those of the Fascist 
states. This prospect is not cheering for those who 
recognize only too clearly that the world crisis is 
due as much to the shortcomings of the democracies 
as to the actions of the dictatorships. Nor could any 
responsible person contend that war would solve 
Europe’s deep-rooted problems, promote democracy, 
or improve the economic condition of the masses. 
Yet, terrible as war would obviously be, is it in the 
long run more, or less, dangerous for civilization 
than the moral disintegration of democratic peoples 
who, like the French, may be forced to adopt dicta- 
torial régimes to preserve their existence in time of 


so-called peace ? 
P VERA MICHELES DEAN 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Mein Kampf, by Adolf Hitler. New York, Reynal & Hitch- 
cock, 1939. $3.00 


Mein Kampf, by Adolf Hitler. New York, Stackpole, 1939. 
$3.00 


Mein Kampf, which is “must” reading for every student 
of European politics, is now available in two unabridged 
translations. The first is an authorized edition; the sec- 
ond was allegedly brought out in violation of copyrights. 
Both use the first German edition and both are marred oc- 
casionally by awkward translations. Reading of the first is 
facilitated by numerous, if somewhat haphazard, annota- 
tions prepared with the aid of a distinguished American 
editorial board. 


Men Must Act, by Lewis Mumford. New York, Harcourt, 
Brace, 1939. $1.50 


Mr. Mumford etches in the sharpest terms the ideologi- 
cal clash between fascism and democracy, and urges that 
the United States adopt a drastic policy of complete non- 
intercourse with Germany, Italy and Japan while prepar- 
ing for war and furnishing limited aid to other anti-fascist 
powers. Unfortunately, under present circumstances, his 
desire for suppression of fascist propaganda and fascist 
activities in this country is likely to open the door to an 
equally unpleasant development: a campaign against lib- 
eral and progressive forces, stigmatized as “communist.” 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 22, March 24, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lgsiig BuELL, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHEies Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


> 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





| 
| 


} 

H 

{ 
if 
; 


Washington News Letter 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


MarcH 20.—The Administration moved swiftly 
this weekend to implement its verbal condemnation 
of Germany’s seizure of Czecho-Slovakia by vigorous 
action on two fronts. First, in applying countervail- 
ing duties against imports from Germany, the Treas- 
ury has taken the initial step in a policy of economic 
retaliation which may be widely extended by execu- 
tive action. Second, in introducing a “compromise” 
resolution to amend the Neutrality Act, Senator Key 
Pittman, chairman of the Foreign Relations Com- 
mittee, has launched the long-awaited campaign in 
Congress to remove further obstacles to freedom of 
action in support of European democracies. 


Three Moves in Sequence. The double objective 
of Administration policy is sharply underlined in the 
following sequence of events: 

1. On March 17 Acting Secretary of State Sumner Welles 
issued a statement to the press, with the approval of Presi- 
dent Roosevelt, strongly condemning “the temporary ex- 
tinguishment of the liberties of a free and independent 
people,” and asserting that “it is manifest that acts of 
wanton lawlessness and of arbitrary force are threatening 
world peace and the very structure of modern civilization.” 

2. On the same day the State a pega began drafting 
a formal note to Berlin, dispatched on March 20, reassert- 
ing its condemnation and declining to recognize the legality 
of Germany’s occupation of Czecho-Slovakia. 

3. On March 18 the Treasury Department announced 
that the provisions of Section 303 of the Tariff Act of 
1930 will come into force on April 22, applying an addi- 
tional duty of 25 per cent on imports from Germany which 
are shown to be subsidized by the government. 

These steps, coupled with the neutrality drive, are 
based on a deep-seated conviction and two broad as- 
sumptions which are shared by President Roosevelt 
and a majority of his State Department advisers. The 
conviction is that the vital interests and security of 
the United States are jeopardized by the expansion 
of the totalitarian powers. The first assumption is 
that Hitler, after consolidating his gains in the east, 
will turn against the Western democracies by sup- 
porting Mussolini's aspirations in Africa and the 
Mediterranean—unless both members of the Rome- 
Berlin axis are convinced in advance that such a 
course will precipitate a general war. The second 
assumption is that Britain and France will resist fur- 
ther aggression by the dictators, provided they can 
count on the moral support of the United States, 
backed by its vast economic and financial sources. 


“Cash-and-Carry” Neutrality. The nature of the 
economic aid offered by the Administration is fore- 





cast in the Treasury's first step toward retaliation 
and Mr. Pittman’s move to open the American mar. 
ket for purchase of arms, airplanes and other war 
materials. While Mr. Pittman disclaims Administra. 
tion sponsorship for his neutrality amendment, jt 
is no secret that the cash-and-carry formula is now 
favored by the State Department as the least ob 
jectionable compromise which has any chance of 
adoption at this session. It would eliminate Sec. 
tion 1 of the existing law, with its embargo on arms 
and ammunition, and avoid all reference to civil 
strife. In place of the embargo, it would require the 
President, ‘‘within thirty days of the outbreak of 
declared or undeclared conflict” between two or 
more foreign states, to issue a proclamation making 
it unlawful to export arms or other war materials in 
American vessels, forbidding loans or credits to 
belligerents, and thus requiring that all such exports 
be paid for in cash. 
But the effect of these steps is less clearly apparent 
than their purpose. While the cash-and-carry clause 
would give Britain and France access to our market, 
it would penalize China by cutting it off from further 
credits. And the “thirty days’’ proviso would pre- 
sumably compel the President to invoke the Act in 
the Far Eastern conflict. 
The Treasury's countervailing duties will not au- 
tomatically cut off German trade or even prevent the 
entry of all German imports, as reported in most 
Washington dispatches. They will apply only to 
“dutiable imports” which benefit from a “‘bounty’’ or 
“grant” from the German government. In practice, 
this covers only German imports financed on a bar- 
ter basis, and represents a relatively small share of 
the $64,625,000 of German goods sold in the United 
States. Stronger punitive measures may be taken un- 
der other tariff statutes, particularly Section 338 of 
the 1930 law but, unless such reprisals are taken 
with other nations, as part of a concerted boycott, 
they cannot have any decisive effect and may lead to 
counter-reprisals. 
The paramount question in Congressional circles, 
however, is on what terms American aid is to be 
furnished to Britain and France. Many question the 
assumption that the democracies are prepared to re- 
sist further aggression, while others want to know 
what information the State Department has received 
regarding the future intentions of London and Paris. 
It is one thing to agree on terms of cooperation, and 

quite another to issue a blank check. 
W. T. STONE 









\| 


- oo o = 


= rr Fs 


—_ “ 


~~ 








