| os on 





ent 
ble 


RFS 


oT 


a 
> in 


ate, 


out 
an, 
Oft- 
eri- 


her 


. it 
Ose 


lar- 
ted 
han 


rts 
‘ich 
934 
ade 
> is 
‘OV- 


last 
the 
sed 


'ga- 


at- 
in 
ind 


kes 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XVIII, No. 37 JULY 7, 1939 





F.P.A. RADIO PROGRAM CONTINUES 


The discussion of current world affairs, broadcast by 
members of the F.P.A. research staff over Station WNYC 
in June, will be continued in July. Please note that this 
broadcast will now take place on Wednesdays from 
8:45 to 9 p.m. 


JUL 24 1939 











Entered as second- 

class matter December 

ero hhign 2, 1921, at the Post 

> ae . Office at New York, 

a os xy wie N. Y., under the act 
a ya of March 3, 1879. 





General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











WILL HITLER TAKE “NO” FOR AN ANSWER? 





oe taLE negotiations were opening in Tokyo for 
settlement of the Tientsin controversy, the 
spotlight of the far-flung struggle between the axis 
powers and the Western world turned once more to 
Europe. The arrival in Danzig of Germans from 
East Prussia, obviously bent on staging a coup for 
return of the Free City to the Reich, was one of many 
indications that Hitler was on the point of repeating 
the technique he had used so successfully in Austria 
and Czecho-Slovakia. The only question was whether 
Britain and France would stage another Munich, or 
resist further German expansion even at the risk of 
precipitating a general war. Any attempt at predic- 
tion in a crisis governed by irrational factors and 
unbridled propaganda would be foolhardy; but cer- 
tain aspects of the situation are already clear. 


1. The experience of 1938 definitely demonstrated that it 
is not in Hitler’s character to take “no” for an answer. It 
was therefore to be expected that the check administered 
to him by Poland in March, when Warsaw declined his de- 
mand for the return of Danzig and the right to construct 
a motor road through the Polish Corridor, would be coun- 
ter-checked at the earliest opportunity. Hitler doubtless 
hopes to achieve his objective by “peaceful” means. Yet he 
might not be reluctant to wage a “local” war with Poland, 
provided it did not develop into general war. 

2. Most observers believe that Poland, having learned a 
lesson from Czechoslovakia, will resist with force any at- 
tempt by Germany to alter the status of Danzig, whatever 
form it may take. If Poland must fight Germany alone— 
without hope of Western or Soviet aid—its chances of vic- 
tory are regarded as extremely doubtful. But if Poland re- 
sists, then Britain and France are pledged to give the Poles 
all the assistance in their power—unless they are induced by 
German propaganda and their own fear of war into arguing 
that Poland, not the Reich, has taken the offensive. 

3. It would be unrealistic, on the basis of past experience, 
to exclude the possibility of another Munich so long as Mr. 
Chamberlain and M. Bonnet remain at the helm. Should 
Britain and France force Poland to yield Danzig as they 
forced Czechoslovakia to surrender Sudetenland, it can be 
predicted without undue fear of contradiction that such in- 


fluence as the Western powers had regained on the continent 
since March will be lost beyond recall; that all countries 
still vacillating between the two camps will stampede to the 
German side; that Europe will have to resign itself perhaps 
for a generation, to domination by Germany; and that the 
United States will turn to a policy of continental isolation, 

4. Indications are not lacking, however, that Britain and 
France may avoid another Munich. Germany's annexation 
of Bohemia and Moravia, in obvious violation of Nazi ra- 
cial principles, has undercut the arguments of French and 
British ‘‘Munichists” ; while its vague demand for “living 
space” has frightened diehard imperialists who had been 
ready to sacrifice Eastern Europe, but not Anglo-French 
colonial possessions. Premier Daladier on June 27, Lord 
Halifax on June 29, King George and Mr. Chamberlain on 
July 2, spoke as men who had no further illusions about 
Hitler, and were prepared for a military showdown if no 
other course was left open. 

None of them, it is true, said in so many words that 
German action in Danzig would mean war; and their as- 
sertions would have carried greater weight, both in Ger- 
many and elsewhere, if accompanied by a real change of 
government personnel. Such changes, however, may be im- 
pending, at least in Britain, where it is rumored that Mr. 
Chamberlain will take Winston Churchill and Anthony 
Eden into the cabinet. The recall of Churchill would un- 
doubtedly have a tonic effect, especially in the U.S.S.R., 
where this able Tory is more trusted than either Mr. Cham- 
berlain or the Laborites. The Pravda article of June 29, 
in which Zhdanov, Soviet propaganda chief, expressed grave 
suspicion of Mr. Chamberlain's tactics, may have been de- 
signed to force a change in the British cabinet which would 
permit prompt consummation of the Anglo-Soviet pact, in- 
cluding imposition of a guarantee on the Baltic states. 

5. Difficult as it is to forecast the actions of the Western 
powers, it is equally difficult to determine whether Hitler 
could now retreat on Danzig. There seems to be little doubt 
that the “encirclement” idea has gained ground in Ger- . 
many, and may have counteracted the fear of war which the 
German people displayed last September. At the same time, 
signs of increasing nervousness, especially over the country’s 
economic situation, can be detected behind the monolithic 
facade of German totalitarianism. The test of nerves to 
which Europe has been subjected by Hitler is double-edged. 
It cannot, in the long run, fail to affect the Germans as much 
—and possibly more than—other peoples. 











SNES 
———— 








The belief that the Germans might welcome some 
indication that the outside world was now ready to 
resist further sabre-rattling dictated the appeal 
broadcast by the British Labor party on July 1. This 
appeal—taken in conjunction with Poland’s deter- 
mination to resist—may merely help Hitler to con- 
vince the Germans that they are being “encircled.” 
On the other hand visible indications of resistance 
and unity on the part of the Western powers may 
serve to break the spell cast by Hitler over both 
Germany and the world. In this connection, it seems 
a foregone conclusion that the decision of the House 
of Representatives, on June 30, to retain the auto- 
matic arms embargo of the Neutrality Act—save for 
“implements of war’’—will be interpreted in Berlin 
as a sign that, in case of a European war, the United 
States might for a time withhold military assistance 
from France and Britain. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


SENATE HITS PRESIDENT’S MONEY CONTROL 


On July 1, the President of the United States was 
for the first time in more than six years without 
power either to alter the gold value of the dollar or 
control currency fluctuations by means of the $2,- 
000,000,000 Stabilization Fund. Both powers, em- 
bodied in legislation which expired on June 30, were 
lost as a result of the revolt which opened on Mon- 
day, June 26, when a Senate bloc, composed of Re- 
publicans, conservative Democrats and a group 
whose interest lay in a silver subsidy, voted to end 
the President's power over gold but continue the 
Stabilization Fund. This coalition was made possible 
by appeasing the silver bloc with a clause raising the 
domestic purchase price of this metal to 77.57 cents 
per ounce from the existing 64.64 cent level and dis- 
continuing Treasury purchase of foreign silver. 

An immediate counter-attack was launched by the 
President and Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau, 
both of whom insisted that the maintenance of full 
powers over the dollar was of vital importance to 
the international position of the United States, par- 
ticularly at this critical juncture in world affairs. 
Support for the Administration was found in the 
House of Representatives, which on June 28 rejected 
the Senate bill. A compromise measure, embodying 
the restoration of dollar devaluation power and the 
continuance of foreign silver purchases but raising 
the domestic silver price payable to 70.95 cents, was 
favorably received by a conference committee the 
following day. Only a few hours before the dead- 
line, the bill reached the Senate floor, where it was 
easily blocked by a filibuster. 


Puge Two 








— 
——— 


Before adjournment, however, an agreement was 
reached to put the President's monetary powers tp 
a vote at 6 P.M. on July 5 and, in the meantime, the 
Administration had the long holiday week-end 
marshal its forces. It is not yet clear, however, 
whether favorable action would mean the restorm. 
tion of full monetary powers, along with the rela. 
tively minor change in the status of silver purchases 
or whether, as the leaders of the Senate revolt cop. 
tend, entirely new legislation would have to be acted 
on in the routine way. The Stabilization Fund has 
already reverted to the general funds of the Treas 
ury, and it is the Republican contention — contra. 
dicted by the Attorney General—that a Congres 
sional appropriation would be necessary to restore it 


This struggle over the President's monetary pov- 
ers has struck at one of the most important features 
of the New Deal’s economic and financial structure 
The depreciation of the dollar was decided upon 
shortly after President Roosevelt assumed office in 
1933 to raise the general level of prices and thus 
relieve deflationary pressure. The price-raising phase 
of monetary policy came to an apparent halt when 
the dollar was fixed at 59.06 per cent of its former 
gold value on January 31, 1934, although the Presi- 
dent retained the power—until June 30—to alter its 
gold content to not less than 50 per cent and not 
more than 60 per cent of former parity. 


This power has never been exercised, but it is now 
revealed that its mere existence prevented further 
depreciation of the pound last December. Mean 
while, the Stabilization Fund has unquestionably op- 
erated—notably since the Tri-Partite Agreement of 
1936—to prevent violent currency fluctuations during 
a period characterized by huge and sudden interna- 
tional capital movements. Removal of both forms 
of control over the dollar would tie the hands of 
the United States in any future currency depreciation 
race, but a possible loophole is afforded by Section 8 
of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, which remains ® 
effect. This section gives the Secretary of the Treasury 
broad powers to purchase gold with funds not other 
wise appropriated at “such rates and upon such terms 
and conditions as he may deem most advantageous 
to the public interest.” Moreover, the possibility of 
competitive currency depreciation—which is largely 
a question of the pound and the French franc—has 
been considerably diminished by the evident disin- 
clination of the Western powers to alienate the 
United States at this critical time. 


HowarbD J. TRUEBLOOD 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 37, Jury 7, 


Biss 


1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lusi Busit, President; DorotHy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHeLes Dsan, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 





EC 


\\ 


—- 


st OO ee eo 


