


ial 








Ann Arbor, Mich, 


vr. Willian i. 


# Untvor 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


‘ 

= 

PSity of 
0 


J Nich} “ 








were | 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 8 


DEceMBER 10, 1948 





CAIRO PACT ACCELERATES CHINA’S RISE TO GREAT POWER STATUS 


hem published decisions reached at Cairo during 
November 22-26 by Roosevelt, Churchill and 
Chiang Kai-shek have been welcomed in this coun- 
try as important additions to the results achieved by 
the Moscow conference of Foreign Ministers in Oc- 
tober. It is widely recognized that the agreement to 
strip Japan of Pacific islands occupied since 1914, to 
restore to China all territories seized by Japan—such 
as Manchuria, Formosa and the Pescadores Islands 
—and to deprive the enemy of all other areas “taken 
by violence and greed” goes a long way toward de- 
fining “unconditional surrender’ in Far Eastern 
terms. The expression of Allied determination that 
“in due course Korea shall become free and independ- 
ent” is regarded as a desirable pledge of freedom to a 
people long enslaved by Japan—a pledge which is 
strengthened, in view of the qualifying clause it con- 
tains, by the declaration that the Allies “covet no gain 
for themselves and have no thought of territorial ex- 
pansion.” At the same time, the opening sentence 
of the Cairo communiqué—‘‘the several military mis- 
sions have agreed upon future military operations 
against Japan’’—indicates that thought was given to 
the means of achieving the political objectives set 
forth. 

CHINA’S NEW EQUALITY. The most impor- 
tant aspect of the three-power agreement is not the 
punishment with which it threatens Japan, but the 
fecognition it both grants and promises to China. The 
fact that the Generalissimo conferred on terms of 
equality with the heads of the British and American 
governments represents the greatest advance yet made 
in the establishment of China’s position in the ranks 
of the United Nations’ Big Four. This is the kind 
of recognition for which Chinese nationalists have 
been struggling and dying for many decades. That 
the result has lost something of its savor because it 
is so long overdue, and because the present position 
of the Chinese is so difficult, should not blind us to 


the revolutionary significance of the event. For the 
first time in history the rise of a semi-colonial nation 
to the status of a great power is being acknowledged 
and encouraged. 

It has been suggested in some circles that China's 
present strength does not warrant its elevation to 
the rank implied by the Cairo communiqué and the 
Moscow Four-Nation Declaration. According to this 
view, the Chinese, although fourth in stature among 
the United Nations, are in a different power class 
from the Americans, British and Russians. This last 
assertion is unquestionably true as a statement of 
fact, but the conclusion drawn from it misses the 
mark. China has now reached a point at which it has 
the possibility over a period of years of becoming a 
truly great power, perhaps the leading state in Asia. 
Whether this possibility will be realized and, if so, 
how long a period will be required are matters be- 
yond accurate prediction. What Britain and the 
United States have done at Cairo is to give China 
assurances that several territorial obstacles will not 
be placed in the way of its future development: They 
have not by any means disposed of all possible ex- 
ternal obstacles to that development, nor have they 
given guarantees that China will become a great 
power; for their policies toward the Chinese Re- 
public are still in the process of evolution, while, 
with the best of will, no nation can guarantee the 
future of another. They have simply promised China, 
to a larger extent than ever before, that it will bear 
responsibility for its own future. 

THE RUSSIAN ATTITUDE. That the U.S.S.R. 
was not represented at Cairo and that Chiang Kai- 
shek did not subsequently go to Teheran was due 
presumably to the present state of Soviet-Japanese 
neutrality. But this should not be taken as indicating 
any lack of interest on the part of the U.'S.S.R. in 
the decisions reached, especially those concerning 
Korea and Manchuria, which lie on its Far Eastern 


H 
; 
7 


ee 











——————_—__——— 








—S=_ = Ps PageTwe 


borders and affect its security. Nor should it be for- 
gotten that the decisions reached at Moscow in Oc- 
tober laid the basis for the Cairo meeting. We do 
not know what discussions of Far Eastern matters 
may have occurred among the United States, Britain 
and the U.S.S.R., but it seems exceedingly doubtful 
that Washington and London would make pledges 
on Manchuria and Korea at this stage of the war if 
they had not first established a firm basis of coopera- 
tion with the Soviet Union or if they knew that the 
U.S.S.R. was opposed to any particular move. 

WHY WAS HONGKONG OMITTED? The 
chief criticism raised concerning the Cairo commu- 
niqué is that it omitted a number of points of im- 
portance for the future of the Far East, namely, the 
status of Hongkong, the Netherlands East Indies and 
other colonial areas. There is no doubt that, without 
the settlement of these problems, the future of the 
Far East will be dark. But was this the occasion for 
a settlement? Could it be expected that the first time 
the United States, Britain and China conferred on a 
basis of equality they would dispose of all Asiatic 
problems? Very wisely, the conferees decided to 
limit themselves to certain aspects of that immediate 
problem on which they were most capable of reaching 
agreement: the disposition of the enemy. 

At the same time, a realistic view of the Cairo de- 
cisions suggests that they will facilitate the solution 
of many problems that were not mentioned. The 
pledge of independence to Korea, even though quali- 
fied by the phrase ‘‘in due course,” and the promise 
of the return of Chinese territories surely have im- 








—<——— 


plications for the future of colonial Asia. With 
gard to Hongkong in particular, although Britajy 
will be extremely reluctant to see the territory retum 
to China after the war, it is difficult to escape the cop. 
clusion that the Cairo conference has strengthened 
China’s hand in any efforts it may make to seek retro. 
cession. 


These considerations suggest that the results 
achieved at Cairo should be regarded not as an end. 
point, but simply as one step in a long, arduous pro 
cess—the process of winning the Far Eastern war, 
establishing a sound peace in that region and adjus. 
ing the Western world to the new importance of 
Asiatic countries, especially China. If it is true that 
many questions remain, it is also worth noting tha 
several issues that previously disturbed American 
British-Chinese relations, have been pushed toward 
solution. This is especially important in connectiog 
with the complaint voiced by the Chinese until re 
cently that they were not being consulted on an equal 
basis in Far Eastern military discussions. Similarly 
Chinese fears that Formosa would not be returned tp 
their sovereignty because some Americans believed 
that the island should become a United Nations base 
presumably have been relieved. Therefore, while the 
progress made at Cairo is neither complete nor it 
revocable and does not preclude the emergence of 
extremely acute differences in the future, it certainly 
constitutes a significant forward move and can lay 
the basis for other, equally fruitful discussions. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


TEHERAN ACCORD PLEDGES FREEDOM OF SMALL NATIONS 


While the conference held by Roosevelt, Churchill 
and Stalin at the Soviet Embassy in Teheran—tech- 
nically on Russian territory—from November 28 to 
December 1 produced no such far-reaching declara- 
tion about the future of Germany as that made 
in Cairo concerning the disposal of Japan’s con- 
quests in Asia, it resulted in three important state- 
ments. First—and, from the point of view of Mos- 
cow, foremost—the three participants declared that 
they had “reached complete agreement as to the scope 
and timing of operations which will be undertaken 
from the east, west and south” against Ger- 
many, thus disposing, so far as diplomatic negotia- 
tions are concerned, of the “second front’’ issue. Sec- 
ond, they invited Germany's satellites to desert the 
Nazis and join the United Nations by declaring that 
they will seek “the cooperation and active participa- 
tion of all nations, large and small, whose peoples in 
heart and in mind are dedicated, as are our own 
peoples, to the elimination of tyranny and slavery, op- 
pression and intolerance.” Third, and perhaps, for 
the long run, most important, Russia, Britain and 
the United States assured Iran in a separate declara- 


tion that they are at one with its government 
“in their desire for the maintenance of the inde 
pendence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
Iran,” adding that they ‘count upon the participation 
of Iran, together with all other peace-loving nations, 
in the establishment of international peace, security 
and prosperity after the war, in accordance with the 
principles of the Atlantic Charter, to which all fout 
Governments have continued to subscribe.’ 

As political and military conferences among tht 
four great powers—Britain, Russia, China and the 
United States—alternate with technical conferences 
of the United and Associated Nations, such as the 
Food Conference in Hot Springs and the United Ne 
tions Relief and Rehabilitation Council in Atlantic 
City, the pattern of future relations between great 
powers and small gradually begins to unfold. It has 
been clear for some time that, unless those countries 
which have at their command great military and ece 
nomic power can reach an agreement as to their waf 
and post-war plans, there can be little or no hope of 
world organization once hostilities are over. But i 
has been equally clear that if such agreement i 








Se BAP BE? 


oo 


- 


nent 
nde 
r of 
tion 
ions, 


» the 


the 
| the 
=nices 
; the 
Ne 
antic 
great 
t has 
tries 
| eco 
r Wal 
pe of 
but it 
nt i 








a 
_ ——— 


reached at the expense, or to the deteriment of, 
weaker peoples—whether the long-established small 
national states of Europe or the emerging national 
groups of Asia—it would not survive the stress and 
strain of post-war readjustments. 


FORGING A NEW ORDER. The compromise 
now being worked out at successive United Nations 
conferences represents an attempt to combine recog- 
nition of the equal rights of all nations, large and 
small, to a voice in the determination of their future 
destiny, with a graduated scale of responsibilities for 
each nation, determined roughly by the power at 
its command. It is obvious that Britain, Russia, China 
and the United States are in a better position—not 
through any inherent virtue, but because of the mag- 
nitude of their territory, population, natural re- 
sources, or industrial development—to resist aggres- 
sion than, for example, Poland, Greece, or Burma. 
But if this fortuitous power should be used by Britain, 
Russia, China and the United States, alone or in 
concert, to impose their will on smaller nations, re- 
curring conflicts, rather than the prospect of post- 
war stability, would be in store for the world. The 
small nations are ready and willing to acknowledge 
the superior strength of the great powers, and to 
rly on that strength for their future protection. In 
fact, a complaint the small nations could legitimate- 
ly lodge against the great powers, especially Britain 
and the United States, is that, in the recent past, they 
claimed superiority without displaying the will or 
capacity to defend not only weaker nations, but even 
their own colonies. What the small nations want is 
not to vie with the great powers for military, political 
or economic leadership, but to obtain protection from 
encroachments by any one of them, and the oppor- 
tunity to develop, in relative peace, the practices and 
beliefs that are the core of genuine nationalism. Such 
opportunity can come only if the great powers, in 
turn, are at peace among themselves. Otherwise, they 








What role will Russia play in post-war Europe? 
For a survey of some of the basic questions that 
preoccupy public opinion in the United States 


today, READ— 
THE U.S.S.R. AND POST-WAR EUROPE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


Vol. XIX, No. 11, of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
RFPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 








Page Three 








eel 
a mn 





will continue to use the small nations as pawns in 
their own struggle for ascendency, and thus encout- 
age their weaker neighbors to play one great power 
against another. 

To effect the transition to a world order where all 
nations would enjoy equality of rights, and assume 
responsibilities commensurate with their strength, 
will not be an easy matter. This was indicated by a 
speech Jan Smuts, Prime Minister of the Union of 
South Africa, delivered in London on November 25, 
in which he urged Britain to draw within its orbit 
the ‘‘small democracies in Western Europe,” so as 
to counterbalance the growing might of Russia and 
the United States. Such a policy would be in direct 
contradiction to that being evolved at the conferences 
of the United Nations, where an attempt has been 
made to reach agreements on a global basis, not on 
the basis of new spheres of influence subject to this or 
that great power. 


NEW PROBLEMS FACE ALLIES. But even when 
the Allies act in concert on the continent of Europe, 
their decisions are bound to provoke objections from 
one group or another among the nations affected. 
While Britain and the United States are being de- 
nounced by Italian liberals under the leadership of 
Count Sforza and Benedetto Croce for perpetuating 
fascism in southern Italy through their toleration 
of King Victor Emmanuel, they are being attacked 
with equal bitterness by the government of King 
Peter of Yugoslavia, now in Cairo, for their alleged 
connivance in the establishment of a provisional ré- 
gime by the Yugoslav Partisans, announced on De- 
cember 4. The great powers, which had been hitherto 
working on the assumption that the armies of lib- 
eration would be greeted by grateful populations 
too weary to take the initiative in effecting their own 
rehabilitation, and would, for an indefinite period 
of time, be charged with the administration of lib- 
erated areas, are now discovering that the conquered 
peoples want to have a share in the reconstruction 
of a continent which, had it not been for their re- 
sistance, would by now be irretrievably subject to 
German rule. What is more, the best hope that the 
peoples of Europe can recover from the ravages of 
Nazism lies in their desire to choose their own way 
of life; and the best hope of enlisting their support 
for the plans of the great powers is to assure them, by 
concrete measures, that what the great powers expect 
is not sullen acquiescence, but voluntary and active 
collaboration. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 8, DacemBER 10, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FranK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dan, Editor. Entered as 
tcond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


Bowie 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

















Washington News LE etter 














Dec. 6.—The Administration is fighting inflation 
not only to preserve domestic stability but to strength- 
en its foreign policy, which is predicated on interna- 
tional political cooperation and the abandonment of 
isolation. The spiral of prices in any country—espe- 
cially one with the economic power and influence of 
the United States—has a profound effect on other na- 
tions in ordinary times, when trade flows in response 
to demand and sales opportunities. Even in these ex- 
traordinary times, when international commerce is 
subjected on every hand to rigid official controls, the 
slow-rising U.S. price level is causing repercussions 
outside our borders. It has already aroused concern 
in Canada, which buys many essential goods in our 
markets, for Canada fears it will be unable to main- 
tain its carefully controlled price ceilings if ceilings 
in the United States inch upward. 


THREAT TO LEND-LEASE AND UNRRA. The 
effectiveness of Congressional appropriations for cur- 
rent operations abroad would diminish sharply 
should the value of money here rapidly decline, there- 
by decreasing the purchasing value of appropriated 
lend-lease dollars. Inflation would increase the cost 
of goods needed by the United Nations Relief and 
Rehabilitation Administration, and it is a serious 
question whether Congress—which has not yet set 
aside the amount representing this country’s share of 
UNRRA expenditures—would be willing to appro- 
priate the additional funds that would be made nec- 
essary by a rise in prices. The smooth conduct of 
foreign relations is also jeopardized by inflation, for 
diplomatic agents are included in that large class of 
salaried men and women who have to adjust their 
living standards downward as their inflexible in- 
comes decline in purchasing power. 


Inflation, moreover, can affect decisions concern- 
ing international policy on its highest levels. For in- 
stance, inflation at home as well as abroad helped 
to drive this country into economic isolation in 1921, 
following World War I. Congress in that year passed 
the Emergency Tariff Act, both to satisfy the agricul- 
tural West, which was faced with a severe drop from 
war-inflated food prices, and to protect American 
industry against cheap goods from inflation-ridden 
countries in Europe, which by “dumping” might have 
tried to obtain dollars to bolster up their curréncies. 
This measure was the opening shot in the tariff war 
that shook the world in the 1920’s and 1930’s—an 


economic war resulting in import-quota schemes 
“Buy American,” Empire preference, blocked-mark 
and German trade subsidies and, finally, military 
conflict. 

So, whether inflation comes at home or abroad, jf 
threatens the cooperative policy inaugurated at the 
Moscow conference. Only China’s forced isolation 
from the rest of the world keeps its severe inflation 
from having a world effect beyond disturbance of the 
living standards of resident foreigners. China today 
can buy practically no goods from other countries, 
and deterioration in the value of its money has there 
fore no influence abroad. Nor does inflation ig 
Greece, where the drachma has practically lost it 
value, affect the world now, since Greece is walled 
in within the “fortress of Europe.” Growing infla 
tion in Germany may have a useful international ef. 
fect, since it may speed the collapse of Nazism, but 
the German inflation as such does not affect the world 
outside Europe. In the post-war world, however, 
inflation in any country, whether ex-enemy or lib 
erated from the enemy, might jeopardize the interna 
tional system of political unity for which the United 
Nations are now planning. 

INFLATION IN GERMANY. A flight from cur 
rency is already beginning in Germany, where the 
people want goods that will last, not money that ma 
vanish. Even items like old copies of Life are selling 
at fantastic levels. Inflation so excessive that mong 
loses all value is dispiriting to its victims, and the 
world is suffering now partly because a beaten Get 
many once went through the agonies of skyscraping 
inflation. The 74,954,803,000,000,000 paper mark 
circulating in Germany at the end of 1923 hadi 
value of only 722,000,000 gold marks in dollars. 

The United States and Britain have been discussing 
currency stabilization, and the Soviet Union plans to 
join them in a monetary conference to be held some 
time this winter. Anglo-American proposals for 
world currency stabilization are inspired by a de 
termination to prevent damage to international 
operation after the war by checking competitive dé 
valuation of currencies and maintaining stability of 
exchange rates. Inflation in any of the world’s majot 
countries would make such an objective very difficult 
to realize. To an extent that can hardly be over 
emphasized, hopes for world political unity depent 
for their realization on world economic stability. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


191 


—— 


Vou. X 


—— 


UNR' 


Mrs. 
porar: 
HE 
hat 
work 
cl of 
Admit 
the th 
tions < 

out a 
In per 
the Ai 
assura 
will r 
on the 
needec 
the U 
furop 
contin 
declar 
the fu 


It 1 
opinic 
four 1 
traditi 
were « 
of rel 
gence: 
sues 
paniz: 
Cussec 
the ur 
je th 

lief a 
Atlan 

Th 
tered 
telatic 





