a 
XY 


hing 


rom 
S$ in 
e of 
ding 
ures, 
Aries 


One 
pre- 


esti- | 


| ap- 
> eX. 
con- 


ense | 


egu- 
“A? 
get 
000,- 
tions 
allo- 
1reau 
e for 
t the 
ry to 
Navy 
)pria- 
Con- 


GET 
10,037 
19,256 
32,540 


00,000 


21,833 
43,400 
99,842 


21,166 
02,188 


‘85,080 


63,000 
100,000 


48,080 
26,509 


1e fis- 
35. 


INE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XIX, No. 14 


JANUARY 26, 1940 


-_ 


JUST OUT: A comprehensive survey of the strategic, 
economic and neutrality problems confronting Scandi- 
navia, The Netherlands and Belgium. Read: 


THE OSLO STATES AND THE EUROPEAN WAR 
by A. Randle Elliott 


January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports ....25 cents 


—_ 


nt as second- 

_ nVVve, class matter December 

rT » ia 2, 1921, at the Post 

GENER a isthe Office at New York, 

unty: we N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 


of Michigan 


U.S. PROTESTS INFRINGEMENT OF NEUTRAL RIGHTS 


ee less than five months have passed 
since the outbreak of war in Europe, the United 
States is already embroiled in altercations with the 
belligerents over infringements of its neutral rights. 
The American representations—a reflection of the 
severity with which the war at sea is being conducted 
—are centered on four subjects. On two of these, the 
question of belligerent interference with the trans- 
mission of American mails and the creation of a neu- 
tral zone around the Americas, the British attitude 
presages a long diplomatic controversy. On two 
others, the Allied blockade of German exports and 
the forcible diversion of American ships into British 
ports which American vessels may not enter under 
the Neutrality Act, American protests have not been 
publicly answered. The entire problem of British 


| control of American trade with neutrals was brought 


to a focus by an aide mémoire to Great Britain re- 
leased in Washington on January 22. This vigorously 
demanded that the Allies abandon contraband con- 
trol practices in the Mediterranean area imposing 
“wholly unwarrantable’”’ delays of nine to eighteen 
days on American shipping—particularly since Italian 
vessels were held for an average of only four days. 

THE MAIL DISPUTE. The issue of belligerent 
versus neutral rights has also been strongly empha- 


_ Sized by a British note on the treatment of postal 
56,596 | 


correspondence, published January 20, replying to a 
State Department communication of December 27. 
In its protest the United States had cited a number 
of cases in which British authorities removed and 
censored sealed letters carried on British and neutral 


| Ships and addressed to neutral countries. While ad- 


mitting belligerent rights of censorship over mail 
destined for the United Kingdom or normally routed 
through it, this government protested British inter- 
ference with American mails on neutral vessels, 
whether on the high seas or after they had been 


forced to enter British ports. The American position 
is based on article I of the eleventh Hague Conven- 
tion, providing that: ‘“The postal correspondence of 
neutrals or belligerents, whatever its official or pri- 
vate character may be, found on the high seas on 
board a neutral or enemy ship, is inviolable. If the 
ship is detained, the correspondence is forwarded by 
the captor with the least possible delay.” 

The British response, recalling precedents estab- 
lished in 1914-1918, stoutly upholds a belligerent’s 
right to open mail in order to ascertain whether it 
contains contraband such as securities, checks, drafts, 
or industrial diamonds. It cites ‘“‘clear evidence”— 
not published — of the existence of an organized 
traffic of this nature between the United States and 
Germany, and defends the interception of military 
intelligence destined for the enemy. Far from agree- 
ing that their action is illegal, the British contrast 
their policy of examining and forwarding “innocent” 
correspondence with the German destruction of ships 
regardless of the safety of lives or mails. 

On strictly legal grounds these contentions are 
hardly compatible with the blanket provision of the 
eleventh Hague Convention. In its interchange with 
the British, however, this country will be embar- 
rassed by a statement of Secretary of State Lansing, 
on May 24, 1916, that mail containing securities and 
other financial instruments might be classed as mer- 
chandise and hence seized if contraband—an im- 
plied admission of a belligerent right to inspect all 
letters. This damaging concession—specifically cited 
in the British note—was not an oversight. Although 
it injured American commercial interests, Secretary 
Lansing later revealed that American protests on the 
subject were consciously half-hearted, because of sym- 
pathy for the Allied cause and a desire to retain the 
utmost freedom of action if the United States should 
ultimately become a belligerent. After it entered 


the war this country soon established a censorship 
over all mails on vessels touching at American ports. 
By a strange twist of circumstance, a similar British 
inspection of mails carried on American clipper 
planes at Bermuda led Secretary Hull, on January 19, 
to threaten to re-route the trans-Atlantic air line. 

BRITAIN REJECTS NEUTRALITY ZONE. 
While neither party has an undisputed case on the 
question of postal correspondence, the British re- 
sponse of January 16 to the American republics’ 
protest against violation of the Pan-American safety 
zone must be placed in an altogether different cate- 
gory.* Here the question at issue is the extension, 
by the consent of all belligerents, of the zone barred 
to warlike activity from the customary three-mile 
limit to a broad maritime area averaging 300 miles 
in width. Without making any definite commitment 
on this point, the British government laid down such 
sweeping conditions for its acquiescence that they 
are virtually impossible of fulfillment. It would not 
accept such a zone, it declared, unless German war- 
ships and supply ships were prevented from using the 
area as a sanctuary in which they would be safe from 
attack. Non-German vessels, moreover, must be pro- 
hibited from committing unneutral acts, such as use 
of their radios to transmit information to the enemy. 
German warships must not be allowed to pass “with 
impunity” from ocean to ocean through the zone, 
while inter-American German coastwise shipping, 
which earned precious foreign exchange for the 
Reich, must be halted and German shipping in Amer- 
ican harbors laid up for the duration of the war. 

In effect, the British government thus asserts that 
it will not agree to suspend hostile activities in 
American waters until the German flag has disap- 
peared from them—when such activities would nor- 
mally cease in any case. Until that moment arrives, 
London apparently hopes to spin out the corre- 
spondence on the question by raising a number of 
specific points for lengthy diplomatic discussion. 


*For the protest, cf. Foreign Policy Bulletin, December 29, 1939. 


Page Two 


—————, 
— 


Legally, the British cannot be challenged for the 
insistence on the exercise of belligerent rights at se, 
The Inter-American Neutrality Committee of inte. 
national law experts, which has been deliberating jy 
secret at Rio de Janeiro since January 15, is there 
fore confronted with a difficult task if it intends tp 
make the neutral zone effective. 

TROUBLES OF A NEUTRAL. The conflict ove 
the mails and the British refusal to cease interference 
with American shipping outside the immediate are 
of combat are not the only causes of the intense 
irritation now being revealed in Washington. Mod. 
ern economic warfare, as conducted by the Allies 
extends far beyond mere questions of maritime 
rights. In attempting to conserve their foreign ex. 
change resources, the British and French have no 
only rigidly restricted their purchases to their own 
empires wherever possible, but have shifted their 
foreign buying to their allies or to neutrals who will 
agree to deal with them on a strict bilateral basis 
They apparently intend to concentrate their bargain. 
ing power where it may have an important political 
effect, irrespective of ordinary most-favored-nation | 
commercial practices and the principles of the Hull| 
trade program. In such a situation American eco-| 
nomic interests are obviously destined to eer | 
British tobacco purchases have been shifted from this 
country to Turkey and empire areas; shipping space | 
has been allotted by the British for imports of only, 
100,000 bales of American cotton monthly during | 
the next half year; producers of fruits and pork prod. | 
ucts are losing a share of their normal markets. 


Compelling reasons doubtless exist for some of 
these developments. But if Americans should gain| 
the impression that the Allies were refusing to heed| 
their point of view even where the consequences 
were relatively unimportant—as they would prob 
ably be, for example, if mails were permitted to pro 
ceed unmolested to neutral destinations—then the| 
result might be to subject American sympathies toa 
difficult strain. Davip H. Popper 


I 


CHURCHILL TIES ALLIED CAUSE WITH AID TO FINLAND 


Winston Churchill’s radio speech of January 20, 
was the strongest bid yet made in Allied quarters for 
support from Europe’s neutrals. While “all Scandi- 
navia dwells brooding under Nazi and Bolshevik 
threats,” he asserted, only Finland “shows what free 
men can do.” Yet, if the Finns are not to be 
‘worn down and reduced to servitude worse than 
death by the dull, brutish force of overwhelming 
numbers,” the small neutral states must ‘do their 
duty in accordance with the covenant of the League 
and .. . stand together with the British and French 
Empires against aggression and wrong.” Mr. 
Churchill singled out Sweden, Norway, Denmark, 
the Netherlands and Belgium as the chief sufferers 


among the neutrals. If they were not to yield 0) 
barbarous oppression one by one, he warned, all of| 
these free nations, ‘and some others I have not men- 
tioned,” must unite with the Allies in their struggle 
This first open appeal for neutral support gave 
credence to reports that Britain and France would 
like to widen the theatre of war in order to strike | 
at Germany through the Baltic, particularly sinc 
the success of Finnish resistance has reduced thett| 
fear of the U.S.S.R. 

The Scandinavian states and the Low Countries 
were quick to criticize Mr. Churchill’s speech as an 
effort to draw them into war among the great powers. 
Their position was indicated on January 21 by the 


— 
influential 
editorially 
of all is 

propagan 
might cre 
involve th 
of Mr. Ch 
gid to Fir 
especially 
aincant tl 
drew a C 
Finland < 
should jc 
speech fc 
Quai a’C 
ant” equ 
Althougt 
Italian c 
supply © 
dence th: 
of “subst 


AID 7 
ful study 
authoriti 
and a ‘ 
would s 
front be 
London 
announc 
to Finla: 
aircraft 
they cou 
effort. I 
ment ac 
the vig 
countrie 
Norweg 
their ab 
of the § 
the fate 
navian 
to the | 
save Fit 
all othe 
against 

Swed 
tilities, 
and su’ 
followi 
let's sp 
ing “re 
politica 
assistat 


FOREIGN 
Headquart 
Entered as 


— 
ym ~18 
oe 


gain. | 


litical 
Nation 
> Hull 
1 €C0- 
suffer. 
m this 
spac | 
E only 


luring 


prod. 

. | 
me of | 
| gain | 
) heed | 
1eNnces | 
prob- | 
O pro: | 
nthe | 
$ toa 

PER 


ald t0 | 
all of | 
- men- 
ugele. | 
gave 
would 
strike 
since 
theit 


ntries 
as af 
ywers. 


vy the 


eS 
_ 


infuential Danish organ Politiken. This paper stated 
editorially that what the small neutrals fear most 
of all is neither Germany nor the Allies, but the 
propaganda of both belligerents which eventually 
might create suspicion on one side or the other and 
involve them in war against their will. That portion 
of Mr. Churchill’s speech, however, which dealt with 
aid to Finland was predestined to be well received, 
especially in the Scandinavian states, and it is sig- 
sificant that the First Lord of the British Admiralty 
drew a close parallel between his plea for aid to 
Finland and his suggestion that the neutral states 
should join the Allies. Moreover, Mr. Churchill's 
speech followed by one day a revelation from the 
Quai d’Orsay that “many” volunteers and “impor- 
tant” equipment had already left France for Finland. 
Although this aid for the Finns was apparently of 
Italian origin, French disposition to expedite the 
upply of men and material was regarded as evi- 
dence that the Allies intend to carry out their pledges 
of “substantial” assistance to Finland. 


AID TO FINLAND. On January 20, after a care- 
ful study of the Soviet-Finnish war, British military 
authorities reported that 30,000 men, 200 planes, 
and a “generous supply” of military equipment 
would save Finland if they reached the northern 
front before May. Meanwhile, it was recalled in 
London that Britain and France on January 1 had 
announced their dispatch of about 100 fighter planes 
0 Finland, in addition to as much anti-tank and anti- 
aircraft equipment, gasoline and ammunition as 
they could spare without jeopardizing their own war 
effort. It was the transport of some of this equip- 
ment across Sweden and Norway which prompted 
the vigorous German press attacks on these two 
countries early in January. Although the Danish and 
Norwegian Parliaments on January 19 reaffirmed 
their absolute neutrality in Europe’s “big war,” none 
of the Scandinavian countries hides its concern over 
the fate of Finland. They still feel—as the Scandi- 
navian press asserted on January 9—that Nordic aid 
to the Finns is ‘‘an act of self-defense,’ and that to 
save Finland they must cooperate with the Allies and 
all other countries who are prepared to aid the fight 
against Soviet domination. 


Sweden, since the outbreak of Soviet-Finnish hos- 
tilities, has been the leading source of foreign troops 
and supplies for Finland. During the past week— 
following former Foreign Minister Rickard J. Sand- 
ler’s speech in the Riksd: ag on January 17, demand- 
ing “real Swedish help to Finland”—the press and 
political leaders in Sweden have advocated open 
assistance on an even broader scale. On January 19 


Page Three 


[i cmemmeninentl 


Swedish big business interests announced that they 
were sending a cash gift of about $15,000,000 to 
Finland, and other Swedish sources revealed popular 
subscriptions for Finland totaling almost $10,000,- 
000. Simultaneously, Helsinki announced that a 
thousand Swedish volunteer soldiers, using their own 
equipment, were already fighting on the Finnish 
northern fronts. The Swedish troops serve under their 
own commanders, and are gaining practical experi- 
ence which, they feel, will be invaluable if Sweden 
itself should be drawn into war. Finland, like Spain 
during the Spanish conflict, has become a school 
for war. 


The Norwegian attitude toward open aid to Fin- 
land has been more cautious than that of Sweden, 
and reflects the realization in Scandinavia that in- 
volvement in war with the Soviet Union would in- 
vite intervention by the western powers. In fact, the 
small northern countries could scarcely succeed in a 
war with the U.S.S.R. unless they received support 
from Britain, France or Germany. But none of these 
three belligerents could permit its opponents to es- 
tablish bases in Sweden or Norway, and any attempt 
to do so would convert the Scandinavian Peninsula 
into a new battlefield. The dilemma of the northern 
neutrals is thus one of maintaining their equilibrium 
between the western powers without closing the door 
for support against a military threat from the 
U.S.S.R. All of these countries, while actively pre- 
paring to defend themselves if necessary, still hope 
to remain at peace by using the bargaining power of 


their strategic position. 
Bic p A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


F.P.A. LAUNCHES NEW PUBLICATION 


On February 1 the Foreign Policy Association will 
inaugurate a new publication—PAN AMERICAN 
NEWS. This service, which will appear every two 
weeks, is designed to meet a growing demand for 
more adequate coverage on current political and 
economic developments in Latin America than 1s 
available in the daily newspapers. Today, perhaps 
more than ever before, an understanding of Latin 
America is vital to the people of the United States, 
and the aim of the PAN AMERICAN NEWS—by 
emphasizing range, continuity and objectivity—is to 
supply the background for this understanding. 


Mr. John I. B. McCulloch, editor of The Inter- 
American Quarterly, has joined the staff of the 
F.P.A.’s Washington Bureau to direct the PAN 
AMERICAN NEWS, and Mr. Howard J. True- 
blood, F.P.A. Research Associate, will contribute a 
Commercial and Financial Section to each issue. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 14, JANUARY 26, 1940. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


Be 


81 


Publishe< 


eekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
DorotHy F. Lzgert, Se: Vera MicHELES DEAN, 


, under the Act of March 3, Two Dollars a Year. 


National 
Editor. 


retary; 


= 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News L ettec 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JAN. 22.—The issue of aid for Finland is becoming 
a source of increasing embarrassment in Washington, 
as both the Executive and Legislative branches of 
the government continue to search for a formula to 
express the evident sympathies of the American 
people without raising new fears of involvement in 
the European war. 

CREDITS FOR FINLAND? Last week, with 
Congress reluctant to take the initiative, President 
Roosevelt addressed identical letters to Vice-Presi- 
dent Garner and Speaker Bankhead (Jan. 16) sug- 
gesting the opening of new credits for “agricultural 
surpluses and manufactured products, not including 
implements of war.” Ignoring the fact that Finland 
is seeking airplanes and munitions rather than agri- 
cultural surpluses, Mr. Roosevelt added that the 
“most reasonable approach” would be to authorize 
“an increase in the revolving credit fund of the 
Export-Import Bank,’ which has already granted a 
credit of $10,000,000 to the Finnish-American Trad- 
ing Corporation. While contending that such an ex- 
tension of credit at this time, ‘does not in any way 
constitute or threaten any so-called ‘involvement’ in 
European wars,” Mr. Roosevelt studiously refrained 
from attempting to influence the action of Congress, 
within whose jurisdiction the matter lies. 

This cautious proposal met with an equally cau- 
tious response in Congress. The Senate Banking and 
Currency Committee, called into special meeting 
(Jan. 17) to consider the President’s proposal, ad- 
journed for a week after hearing Jesse H. Jones, 
Federal Loan Administrator, give a noncommittal 
explanation of the scheme. Mr. Jones declined to 
comment on the question of policy, and did not en- 
dorse the bill introduced by Senator Prentiss M. 
Brown of Michigan, authorizing an advance of $60,- 
000,000 through the Reconstruction Finance Cor- 
poration and the Export-Import Bank for purchase 
of any materials needed by Finland. The Committee 
discovered, however, that Finland has actually used 
only about $1,000,000 of the $10,000,000 credit ex- 
tended by the Bank last month, indicating that addi- 
tional funds would be of little use to Finland unless 
they could be employed for purchase of war ma- 
terials and munitions. Although several bills were 
introduced to permit loans for military purposes, a 
strong opposition developed in both Houses of Con- 
gress to any action that might be interpreted as a 
departure from the spirit, if not the letter, of the 
Neutrality Act. 


ed 


To understand this attitude, it is necessary to te. 
member that Congress has never fully accepted the 
Executive thesis that our vital interests are directly 
involved in the European conflict. During the neu. 
trality debate last fall, Congress was willing to lift 
the arms embargo on the premise that we could sel! 
munitions to the Allies and still remain “neutral,” 
But it was not prepared to accept the theory thar 
the United States—in its own self-interest—mus 
support the Allies by all means short of sending 
armies to Europe. Since the invasion of Finland, 
Congressional opinion has undoubtedly shifted at 
many points, but to most Washington observers it 
still reflects the widespread popular desire to avoid 
any governmental action which might conceivably 
lead to involvement in the war. 


The dilemma of Congress today arises from the 
fact that it has already given its tacit approval to 
many steps taken by the Executive, based on the as. 
sumption that what is happening in Finland is of 
immediate concern to us. During the past six weeks, 
in addition to the Export-Import Bank loan, the fol- 
lowing ‘‘positive” measures have been taken by dif- 
ferent Executive agencies: 


1. The Navy Department, by releasing the Brewster Air- 
craft company from a prior navy contract, has enabled 
Finland to purchase 44 fighting planes for delivery this 
month. 


The War Department, by facilitating inspection of 
United States arms and airplane factories, has extended 
material aid to the Finnish military mission now in this 
country. 

3. The State Department has broadened the scope of the 
“moral embargo” against Russia and Japan by including 
all “materials essential to airplane manufacture” and 
urging American firms not to supply “technical infor- 
mation of strategic importance.” At the suggestion of 
the Department, several large oil companies have with- 
drawn American engineers who had been directing the 
operations of plants for manufacture of high-test gaso- 
line in Russia. 


4. The Army and Navy Munitions Board, on January 19, 
called attention t» “abnormal” exports of crude rubber 
and tin to certain European countries—understood to 
mean Russia—and warned that unless voluntary coop- 
eration of American exporters can be counted on, “other 
means” will be taken to deal with the situation. 


N 


The only real difference between these measures 
and the proposed credits for Finland is that Con- 
gress, rather than the Executive, has the power to 
determine government policy. And Congress, while 
sympathetic with Finland, is, still fearful of measures 
short of war and not yet convinced that America 
interests are in danger. W. T. STONE 


FORE 


An inter pret. 


FO! 


Vou. XIX, | 
——— 
{NNOU! 


A ne 
in Latin 
the sign 
on trad 
beginnir 


—_—_—_—_—_—_—— 
—_—— 


GEF 


FFICI 
reviv 
Western | 
mander-in. 
eral von | 
the 228th 
the tactica 
preferred 
surprise, ¢ 
and thrus 
Winston | 
chester, in 
war of e 
to stay on 
GERM. 
ever the 
might be 
tes. An 
attendant 
increased 


Allied b 
of oil fr 
stacles. E 
to resum: 
Rumania 

| berg in Ri 

agreed ni 
| stretch e3 

hoped th 
| lieve the 
| line thro 
ments of 

obtain a 
Actually 
to have 
had grea 
Reich to 


ported t« 


