Picions 
ce. that 


ling of 
ste and 
egotia- 
will be 
its are 
wer to 
Dowers 
ngress 
ion. 

:while, 
est the 
British 
sre. So 
 Opin- 
major 
e. The 
fluence 
d asa 
policy, 
he old 
er, the 
South 
ms be: 
would 
When 
several 
- naval 
hed as 
- could 
anting 
STONE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year PBRIGDICAL ROOM Office at New York, 
: r Eo eee GENERAL LIBRARY N. Y., under the act 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated UNIY. OF MICH. of March 3, 1879. 


22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 46 SEPTEMBER 6, 1940 


— 


For defense potentialities of the British bases 
leased by the United States, read: 


EUROPEAN COLONIES IN THE WESTERN 
HEMISPHERE by A. Randle Elliott 


25¢ 


August 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 


SECOND CLASS MAIL 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


BALANCE SHEET OF EUROPE’S WAR 


At the close of Europe's first year of war, the 
outcome of that conflict, which has cast a 
shadow over other continents, remains in the bal- 
ance. When France and Britain, on September 3, 
1939, declared themselves in a state of war with 
Germany, their action was motivated as much by 
profound psychological fatigue with the recurring 
crises to which Europe had been subjected since 1933, 
as by the resolve to check further German expansion. 


ALLIES’ INSISTENCE ON STATUS QUO. The 
passive attitude first adopted by the Allies toward 
their war with Germany corresponded to their pas- 
sive attitude during the preceding twenty years of 
“peace.” During that period, when a forward-look- 
ing program of reforms might well have captured 
the imagination of European youth, and harnessed 
their energies to constructive instead of destructive 
tasks, the main program offered by France and Britain 
was maintenance of the status guo, which was op- 
posed by Germany and Italy, and accepted, rather 
than enthusiastically supported, by other countries 
of the continent. The high hopes which had buoyed 
up the Allied peoples in 1919—that the League of 
Nations would gradually alleviate the political and 
economic problems of Europe and the world—had 
temained unfulfilled. The failure of the Allies to 
press for reconstruction of Europe once victory was 
in their hands created the belief in dissatisfied coun- 
tries that Britain, France, and France’s satellites in 
Eastern Europe were opposing changes not because 
of high moral considerations, but because such 
changes might prove to their disadvantage. Receiv- 
ing no leadership from the Western powers, divided 
among themselves by jealousies and intrigues, Europe 
for at least a decade lived in a state of suspended 
animation, from which it was aroused only by the 
tesurgence of a militant Germany. 

In the moral vacuum created by the apparent 
bankruptcy of Western ideas, Hitler launched a dy- 


namic program which envisaged the reorganization 
of Europe under the leadership of Germany, the re- 
duction of France to the position of a third-class 
power cut off both from its allies in the East and 
from its Empire overseas, and the exclusion of Brit- 
ain and the United States from European affairs. 
Having first allowed Germany to strengthen its mili- 
tary and strategic position by the absorption of Aus- 
tria, the break-up of Czechoslovakia, the test of arms 
in Spain, the formation of an alliance with Italy, and 
the conclusion of a non-aggression pact with Russia, 
the French and British governments—finally yield- 
ing to the pressure of public opinion at home and in 
the United States—made a stand on Poland, which 
they were not in a military position to defend. But 
even when Britain and France took up arms against 
Germany, the only alternative they offered Europe 
was the hope of inflicting another defeat on the 
Reich, and restoration of the status quo. 

The Allies hoped to overcome Germany by an eco- 
nomic blockade, with a minimum of actual warfare. 
But under cover of the Siegfried Line the Reich, 
having effected the partition of Poland on Sep- 
tember 28, began to reorganize Europe east of the 
Rhine on a basis adapted to its war needs. While the 
Allies continued “business as usual,” in expectation 
of an internal German breakdown, the Nazis per- 
fected their military preparations. In April they oc- 
cupied Denmark and invaded Norway, successfully 
checking Allied attempts to eject them from Nor- 
wegian territory. They invaded the Low Countries 
on May 10, conquered the Netherlands and Belgium 
between May 14 and May 28, invaded France and, 
on June 22—Italy having meanwhile entered the wat 
—imposed on the Pétain government the armistice 
of Compiégne. After ten months of war Germany, 
through either outright military domination or politi- 
cal and economic influence, controlled the entire con- 
tinent, except for the European part of Russia, and 


—————— 
i aenamnial 


seemed on the point of crowning its victory by a de- 
cisive attack on Britain. 

GERMAN HEGEMONY CHALLENGED BY 
BRITAIN. German hegemony of the continent, how- 
ever, is still challenged by two European powers— 
Britain and the Soviet Union. Having been forced 
by Germany's victories to liquidate virtually all its 
continental commitments, Britain has concentrated its 
military and economic forces in the British Isles, from 
which it is not only resisting German air attacks, 
but has begun to deliver systematic blows at Ger- 
many, Italy, and German-held territory. Germany, in 
turn, continues its air attacks on Britain, designed to 
cripple British industry, disrupt British shipping, 
and demoralize the British people. In its efforts to 
resist Germany Britain is receiving steadily increas- 
ing aid from its Dominions, and is drawing on the 
expanding industrial resources of the United States; 
while Germany is exploiting the resources of the 
European continent, notably the Balkans, which it 
has sought to pacify by dictating disposition of con- 
troversial territories which might otherwise have 
provoked conflicts between the Balkan countries. 


While Britain has been resisting Germany in the 
West, the Soviet Union has been attempting to im- 
prove its strategic position by the incorporation into 
its territory of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania; the 
conquest of eastern Finland; and the acquisition 
from Rumania of Bessarabia and Northern Buko- 
vina. These Soviet conquests, achieved with a mini- 
mum of bloodshed except in the case of Finland, 
were apparently made with the consent, explicit or 
tacit, of the German government. The Germans, 
however, seem determined to check further Russian 
advances into the Balkans; and the economic as- 
sistance the Reich had hoped to obtain from the 
Soviet Union in the form of food and oil supplies 
has fallen short of German expectations. Yet it 
would be a mistake to establish a connection be- 
tween Britain’s resistance to Germany, and Russia's 
efforts to improve its defensive position in case of 
further Nazi expansion to the east. The Soviet Union, 
. like Germany, would derive tangible benefits from 
the break-up of the British Empire, whose interests 
have clashed with those of Russia for a century in 


AXIS POWERS DICTATE 


By turning the northern half of Transylvania over 
to Hungary the Axis powers have taken one more 
step in their self-appointed task of redrawing the 
boundaries of Europe. The “new order” imposed by 
Germany and Italy may prove no more permanent 
than the “dictate” of Versailles which it is intended 
to replace, but for the moment this thought affords 
little consolation to countries like Rumania, which 
are forced to accept the decisions of Berlin and Rome. 

The Axis powers intervened decisively in the 


Page Two 


the Near and Middle East. 


EUROPE SEEKS NEW ORDER. Meanwhile 
profound changes are taking place in Europe, which 
may completely alter the fabric of European life 
no matter what the outcome of the present cop. 
flict. Disillusionment with the institutions and prac. 
tices of democracy has swept the entire continent, 
including France, where there is a tendency to recon. 
sider France’s policy since the rise of the German 
Empire in 1870, and to undertake a reorientation 
which would detach France both from Britain and 
Russia, and bring it into collaboration with the new 
order contemplated by Germany. At the same time, 
few illusions remain in conquered countries, even 
among Nazi sympathizers, that this new order will 
necessarily prove more desirable, more humane, or 
more constructive than the ‘dictate’ of Versailles. 
If the settlement imposed by Russia on the Baltic 
countries, or by Germany and Italy on Rumania, are 
to be taken as a foretaste of Europe's future, then 
it would be difficult for those who have denounced 
the “imperialism” of ‘“‘demo-plutocracies’” to assert 
that the new order proposed by totalitarian dictator. 
ships offers something new in terms of relations be- 
tween nations. This violent disillusionment with 
both old and new, this widespread discrediting of all 
existing values, may produce either a state of anar- 
chy or a state of apathy. In either case, as happened 
in pre-Hitler Germany, the way would be opened 
to the assumption of power by men who, whatever 
their defects, claim they have concrete ideas and, 
especially, concrete hopes to offer to the European 
masses. In the supreme test which all systems and 
ideologies—Nazism and Communism, no less than 
democracy — are undergoing today in Europe, the 
Western peoples still have as good an opportunity as 
Germany, or Italy, or the Soviet Union to provide a 
rallying-point for human endeavor. But the rallying: 
cry cannot be merely restoration of the status quo. lt 
must reveal comprehension, on the part of the West- 
ern peoples, that the present conflict was precipitated 
not merely by the intransigence or greed of Ger- 
many—that it has deeper causes for which the West, 
too, is responsible, and which the West, too, must 


undertake to correct. VerRA MICHELES DEAN 


RUMANIAN SETTLEMENT 


Hungarian-Rumanian conflict on August 27, after 
direct negotiations between Bucharest and Budapest 
had virtually broken down and a series of border in- 
cidents threatened to precipitate war. Germany and 
Italy were both unwilling to tolerate a Balkan wat 
which would jeopardize their supplies of oil and 


food and might bring about the seizure of additional 


Rumanian territory by the Soviet Union. Hungarian | 


and Rumanian delegates were therefore summoned 
to Vienna, where on August 30 Herr von Ribbentrop 


SE 


THE 
natural 
into the 
tention 
the 10th 
which 1 
area age 
the esta! 
the Pari 
Rumani 
Throug 
a self-ce 
lation, | 
has be 
manian: 
as a spt 

Pend 
is impo 
area an 
sylvani: 
to Buc 
miles v 
cording 
with 2, 
is draw 
the lar 
lers in 
nograp 
that th 
Hunga 
1930 R 
than a 
ment \ 
While 
resettle 
on eac 
Germa 
rangen 
of the 
some 
mania. 
litical, 
been 
Vienn: 
demor 
about | 
by Ge 
grew 
anarck 


The 


a ee 


FOREIG 
Headquai 
Riesead 

— 


Se s530 
‘7c /- 


while, 
which 
n life 
t con. 
| prac- 
tinent, 
recon. 
erman 
tation 
n and 
e new 
» time, 
, even 
r will 
ne, or 
sailles, 
Baltic 
la, are 
, then 
yunced 
assert 
Ctator- 
ns be- 
with 
of all 
anar- 
pened 
pened 
atever 
; and, 
Opean 
is and 
> than 
e, the 
uty as 
vide a 
lying- 
U0. It 
West: 
itated 
~ Ger- 
West, 
must 
:AN 


after 
Japest 
ler in- 
y and 
n wat 
| and 
tional 
varian 
noned 
ntrop 


a 
o~n 


and Count Ciano handed down their “arbitral 
award.” 


THE TRANSYLVANIA ISSUE. Transylvania, a 
natural fortress girded by mountains which juts far 
into the heart of Rumania, has been a bone of con- 
tention ever since the Hungarians conquered it in 
the 10th century. In 1526 Hungary lost it to Turkey, 
which in turn yielded it to Austria in 1683. The 
area again came under Hungarian rule in 1867 with 
the establishment of the dual monarchy, but in 1919 
the Paris Peace Conference compelled its cession to 
Rumania despite bitter protests from Budapest. 
Throughout these vicissitudes Transylvania retained 
a self-centered economic and political life. Its popu- 
lation, like that of many other parts of the Balkans, 
has been inextricably mixed, consisting of Ru- 
manians, Hungarians, Germans and Jews, as well 
as a sprinkling of other people. 


Pending final delimitation of the new frontier it 
is impossible to give accurate figures concerning the 
area and population of the northern half of Tran- 
sylvania which is to go to Hungary. According 
to Bucharest, the transfer involves 19,300 square 
miles with a population of 2,710,348 in 1930; ac- 
cording to Budapest, an area of 17,000 Square miles 
with 2,370,000 inhabitants. While the new boundary 
is drawn in such a way as to include within Hungary 
the large Magyar-speaking settlements of the Szek- 
lers in the eastern corner of Transylvania, the eth- 
nographic character of the territory is so complex 
that thousands of Rumanians will also come under 
Hungarian rule. In fact, calculations based on the 
1930 Rumanian census indicate that, along with less 
than a million Hungarians, the Budapest govern- 
ment will acquire more than a million Rumanians. 
While no provision has been made for compulsory 
resettlement of the Hungarians and Rumanians left 
on each side of the new frontier, it is possible that 
Germany and Italy may press for a “voluntary’’ ar- 
rangement in the hope of preventing any revival 
of the territorial dispute. The bulk of the trouble- 
some German minority, however, remains with Ru- 
mania. The division of Transylvania disrupts a po- 
litical, economic and administrative entity which has 
been preserved for over a thousand years. The 
Vienna award therefore occasioned violent anti-Axis 
demonstrations throughout Rumania, and brought 
about the fall of Premier Gigurtu, who was succeeded 
by General Antonescu on September 4. The danger 
grew that the whole country might fall prey to 
anarchy and dissolution. 


The cession of northern Transylvania, together 


Page Three 


with the loss of Bessarabia and part of Bukovina to 
the U.S.S.R. and the pending transfer of southern 
Dobruja to Bulgaria, will deprive Rumania of al- 
most half of its territory. Neither Rumania’s formal 
renunciation of the British guaranty nor the pro- 
Fascist composition of the Bucharest government 
served to protect the country from territorial dis- 
ruption. King Carol apparently feared that armed 
resistance would give the signal for an immediate 
invasion by the Soviet Union as well as Hungary. 
Incidents along the new Soviet-Rumanian border had 
already brought threats of Russian action on Au- 
gust 19 and 29. 


RUMANIA BECOMES GERMAN PROTEC- 
TORATE. Both Hungary and Rumania are now un- 
reservedly in the camp of Italy and Germany. The 
Budapest government is more than ever before 
bound to the Axis powers, which have twice helped 
it in the realization of its irredentist ambitions; and 
Rumania has received an unqualified guaranty of its 
territorial integrity and inviolability from Rome and 
Berlin. This guaranty is directed primarily against 
the Soviet Union whose encroachments in the Bal- 
kans both Germany and Italy are anxious to stop. 
In a radio speech delivered on August 31 the Ru- 
manian Foreign Minister frankly declared that 
henceforth “‘our politics will not know any other 
policy than the policy of the Axis, in which we put 
all our hopes.” The Rumanian army will be de- 
mobilized, and the country is generally expected to 
assume a status similar to that of Slovakia, which is 
a German military protectorate. On September 3 it 
was reported that German motorized divisions would 
move in to “protect’’ Rumania’s new frontier. 

The Vienna award constitutes a clear warning to 
Yugoslavia and Greece, the only two countries in 
the Balkans proper which have not fully submitted 
to the dictates of the Axis. Like Rumania, they 
profited from the territorial settlement following 
the last war. Belgrade and Athens both fear that 
they may in turn become victims of “peaceful” of- 
fensives by the Axis powers. The Belgrade govern- 
ment is already reported to be negotiating for the 
surrender of part of the Banat—a roughly triangular 
area at the southern end of the Hungarian plain 
which Yugoslavia took from Hungary in 1919. These 
negotiations might have to be followed by other 
Yugoslav territorial concessions to Italy and Italian- 
controlled Albania. As for Greece, its conflict with 
Italy, which has been hanging fire for the past two 
weeks, may now enter a decisive phase. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 46, SepreMBER 6, 1940. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

Sep 181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter wae 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

SEPT. 3.—As Europe enters the second year of 
war the United States, while remaining technically 
at peace, has embarked on a program of total defense 
in some respects more far-reaching than that carried 
out during the first year of American participation 
in the World War. The agreement announced by 
President Roosevelt on September 3, by which the 
United States will transfer 50 over-age destroyers to 
Great Britain and, in return, obtain a lease of British 
naval and air bases in the Western Hemisphere, is 
the most spectacular—and perhaps the most decisive 
—step taken by the United States since the outbreak 
of hostilities a year ago. In so far as this agreement 
implies an extension of the area of American de- 
fense, it may seem to go beyond the program of 
Western Hemisphere defense now approaching the 
final stage of legislative action in Congress. But in 
many ways the agreements with Britain and Canada 
merely implement the program already approved 
by Congress, for which Congress has appropriated 
or authorized more funds than the United States 
spent for prosecution of the war in 1918. 

Within the next few weeks, in all probability, 
Congress will have taken final action on the remain- 
ing legislative measures designed to carry the pres- 
ent program through the fiscal year ending July 1, 
1941. Under the circumstances, a brief summary of 
the main features of this unprecedented program 
may serve to clarify its scope and status. 


STATUS OF DEFENSE PROGRAM 


Appropriations—Between June 11 and June 26, 
when the fall of France completely altered the stra- 
tegic problems confronting the United States, Con- 
gress authorized a total of $5,077,000,000 in direct 
appropriations and contract authorizations for the 
Army and Navy. This sum was contained in the 
regular War and Navy Department Appropriation 
bills for 1941, and the first Supplemental (emer- 
gency) Appropriation bill, passed on June 26. A 
month later, on August 29, the Senate approved the 
Second Supplemental Defense Appropriation bill 
(already passed by the House) carrying an addi- 
tional $5,133,000,000 and raising the total for ex- 
pansion of the armed forces to $10,210,000,000 for 
this fiscal year. This figure exceeds the $6,148,000,- 
000 spent for prosecution of the war in 1918 and 
approaches the peak of $11,031,000,000 for war 
expenditures during 1919. 

Two-Ocean Navy—The Navy’s share of the ten- 


billion-dollar budget amounts to approximately $3. 
290,000,000, most of which will be used to speed 
construction of the 138 ships already in process of 
building or on order at government and private 
yards. Only about $183,000,000 will be spent on 
beginning construction of new ships under the Two. 
Ocean Navy program, which will require six years 
to complete at an estimated cost of four billion dol- 
lars. Relatively small amounts are included in the 
estimates for expansion of government navy yards, 
but the bulk of the new construction is allocated to 
private shipbuilders under contracts permitting rapid 
plant expansion. Apart from ship construction and 
maintenance, the largest single item in the Nav 
budget is $821,000,000 in cash and contract author. 
izations for expansion of naval aviation. The Navy 
now has 1,746 “useful” planes on hand, plus 2,489 
on order. Present plans call for about 5,400 modern 
planes on hand or on order by July 1, 1941, and 
8,900 by July 1, 1942. 

Protective Mobilization Plan — Passage of the 
National Guard resolution (approved August 27) 
and the expected adoption of the Burke-Wadsworth 
Selective Service bill by the House following Sen. 
ate action on August 28 will enable the War De. 
partment to carry out its Protective Mobilization Plan 
late this fall and next spring. This plan, as now 
projected, calls for a force of 1,200,000 organized 
around the Regular Army and the National Guard, 
both of which will be brought to war strength by 
recruits drawn from the selective draft. At their 
present strength, the Regular Army and the Na- 
tional Guard total about 513,000 men. The first 
draft contingent, planned for this fall, will be lim- 
ited to 400,000 men and a similar number will be 
called out in the spring, with successive contingents 
used for replacements. In his testimony before the 
Senate Appropriations Committee, however, Gen- 
eral Marshall, Chief of Staff, indicated that the Pro- 
tective Mobilization Plan force of 1,200,000 was the 
“bare minimum” for defense of the Northern Hemi- 
sphere and the Caribbean area, and that defense of 
the entire Western Hemisphere might require three 
million or even four million men. The War Depart: 
ment budget of $6,809,000,000 provides the ‘“‘essen- 
tial items” of equipment for the Protective Mobiliza- 
tion Plan force, and “critical items” "for a force of 
two million men. 

While the implied objective of the entire program 
is hemisphere defense, the military organization and 
the procurement program are not necessarily limited 


to any geographical area. WILLIAM T. STONE 


FOR 


An inter} 


Vou. XIX 
——— 


WILLIA 


If you 


Or 


German 
destruct: 
ing toll 
congeste 
commur 
at certa 
and tha 
the bac 
British ; 
German 
ber 9. 
sumed « 
territory 
the secc 
the war 
and the 
the Brit 
Gern 
imposes 
territor 
bases ir 
it was 
made a 
Vichy | 
materia 
product 
future. 
with a 
bassadc 
to app 
French 
to fur 
bring t 
ing-poi 
France 
AN 


come ¢ 


