


ently 
Close 
Npire 
other 
aliza- 
mpite 
icized 
tly to 
$ con- 
singly 


ulle’s 
S will 
ire to 
of a 
States 
yn not 
ecause 
peting 


SEL 


- York, 


lent of 
anced, 
ple and 
nt, and 


Boston, 


argues 
of the 


1, Webb 


y York, | 


Macmil- 


rwegian 
ayor of 
German 


or 

National 
Entered # 
rw at leat 








MAY 10 1943 
Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Michtzan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





| You. XXII, No. 29 


May 7, 1948 





ALLIES GAIN BY FRANK DISCUSSION OF JOINT PROBLEMS 


_ fears as may have been aroused among the 
United Nations that the Soviet government, after 
breaking off relations with the Poles in London, 
would retire in high dudgeon to renewed isolation, 
or even consider a separate peace with Germany, 
were effectively dispelled by Stalin in his May Ist 
order of the day. This order breathes the calm assur- 
ance in Russia’s own strength and the confidence in 
ultimate victory which, according to observers re- 
cently back from the Soviet Union, characterize the 
attitude of the Russian people toward the war. But 
it also strikes a new note. For the first time since 
the German invasion of Russia, Stalin paid an en- 
thusiastic tribute to the war effort of the Allies. In 
no uncertain terms he dismissed on their behalf, 
as well as Russia’s, any possibility of peace “with 
the imperialist Fascists who have flooded Europe 
with blood and covered her with gallows,” demand- 
ing, with Mr. Roosevelt and Mr. Churchill, Hitler's 
“unconditional surrender.” Whatever may be the 
future of Polish-Soviet relations, one thing is already 
plain. The historic friction between Poles and Rus- 
sians which the Nazis had tried to fan in the hope of 
dividing the United Nations has not alienated 
Russia from its Allies in the West. On the contrary, 
the Polish-Soviet rift has served to clarify relations 
between the three great powers which are now forg- 
ing an iron ring around Hitler’s European “fortress.” 

RUSSIA WELCOMES FRANKNESS. This favor- 
able result is due, in part, to the self-restraint of the 
Polish Premier, General Sikorski, who has genuinely 
striven for two years to reach an accord with Mos- 
cow, but has been balked again and again by ex- 
tremist nationalists among the Polish émigrés both 
in this country and in Britain. In part it is also due 
to the frankness with which, apparently, both Lon- 
don and Washington have talked to the Soviet gov- 
ernment regarding the two problems at issue—the 
Polish-Soviet frontier, and the status of the Polish 


government in exile, which Soviet spokesmen have 
denounced as “Fascist” in character. Neither Britain 
nor the United States, so far as can be determined, 
is prepared at this time to concede eastern Poland 
to Russia, whatever may be the eventual settlement 
of this centuries-old conflict; nor are they ready to 
force General Sikorski to abdicate in favor of a 
Polish group that might enjoy the support of the 
Kremlin. Desirable as changes in the Polish govern- 
ment might seem, these changes should come, accord- 
ing to London and Washington, as the result of free 
decision on the part of the Poles themselves, not 
through surrender to Russian demands. This point 
was emphasized by Mr. Churchill in his message to 
the Poles on May 2, their National Day, when he 
said that the sacrifices the Poles had made would be 
“crowned by the restoration, to which we all look 
forward, of a great and independent Poland.” 

Frank discussion of these problems had been sorely 
needed to clear the international atmosphere, over- 
charged during the past few months by Polish-Soviet 
suspicion and mutual recrimination. It is unrealistic 
to contend, as some people in Britain and the United 
States do, that Russia should always be coddled 
by other nations and that none of its wishes should 
be crossed for fear of offending Stalin. As a matter 
of fact the Russians—who never hesitate to say what 
they think—expect, and respect, similar bluntness 
from others. What does arouse their suspicions is 
any attempt by the: Western powers to veil motives 
or policies in polite but ambiguous diplomatic 
verbiage. 

There is no reason to believe that a common 
ground cannot be found between the views of Po- 
land and Russia—provided both can be assured that 
in post-war Europe their security will be bulwarked 
by the concerted support of all the United Nations. 
Such assurance will come the more readily if the 
territoriah issues of the continent are not settled 


i 


geese aes. Sle bee 


—— 





Pin ee 




















piecemeal to placate this or that power, great or 
small, but are considered within the general frame- 
work of European, and world, reconstruction. Seen 
in that larger framework, many of the territorial 
= that loom important to individual nations 

ome dwarfed in comparison with the crying need 
for collective action to win the war, alleviate the 
disasters left in its wake, and make a fresh start. 

U.S. MUST CHART MIDDLE COURSE. To lay 
undue stress today on the issues that do, or may, 
separate the various United Nations not only plays 
into the hands of Nazi propagandists. What is even 
more dangerous, it fosters the latent desire of some 
Americans for return to isolationism by making in- 
ternational collaboration appear far more difficult 
than it is, or needs to be. The problems of Europe 
are unquestionably far more complicated than wish- 
ful-thinking reformers would have us believe—but 
they are not beyond the power of human beings to 
adjust. 

Nor is the United States expected to adjust them 
single-handed. It would certainly be the height of 
irony if, in turning our back on isolationism, we 


DISSOLUTION OF COMMONWEALTH NOT ANTICIPATED BY DOMINIONS 


Speaking in Ottawa during the last week of April, 
Joseph M. Tucker, director of a Canadian section of 
the United States War Production Board, recognized 
that Canada does not contemplate any change in its 
status as an autonomous nation within the British 
Commonwealth. Although he referred enthusiasti- 
cally to the benefits which have accrued to both 
Canada and the United States as a result of wartime 
collaboration, Mr. Tucker also pointed out that 
close cooperation had been achieved without impair- 
ing the sovereignty of either country and envisaged 
future relations between them “not as all States in 
one Republic, not as all parts of one Empire—but 
just as we are: independent and inter-dependent 
sovereign nations and friends.” 


CANADIAN LINKS WITH BRITAIN, US. 
This statement should be taken to heart by people in 
this country who anticipate the disintegration of the 
British Commonwealth, and in particular the loosen- 
ing of ties between Canada and Britain if not Can- 


Page Two 





For a survey of the League’s extremely useful con- 
tribution to international collaboration, and an 
analysis of the accomplishments of League agencies 
now functioning, READ— 
GENEVA INSTITUTIONS IN WARTIME 
by Ernest S. Hediger 


25c 


May f issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS aré issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5; to FPA members, $3. 














LL 
a 





should go to the other extreme and jump to the 
conclusion that it is our manifest destiny to cure all 
ills throughout the world and settle all conflicts, 
This is not what the peoples of Europe, or Asia, of 
Latin America want. They hope that the United 
States will not remain aloof from the rest of the 
world after the war, but they have no desire to see 
the United States alone shoulder the task of post. 
war reconstruction. In this task they want to 
play their part—and to play their part neither 
as humble recipients of American handouts, 
nor as sideline admirers of the “American Cen. 
tury,” but as equal partners of the United States, 
What we have to learn is how to work with other 


people, without either neglecting them altogether, } 


or smothering them with exaggerated concern. In 
international affairs, as in all human affairs, there js 
a middle course, a golden mean. The American 
people could make no greater contribution to post- 
war reconstruction than by discovering and practicing 
this golden mean between isolationism on the one 
hand, and imperialism on the other. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


ada’s actual inclusion in the United States. This war, 
like the last, has fostered Canada’s progress towatd 
complete independence. The Canadian government 
deliberately delayed its declaration of war against 
Germany until September 10, 1939—a week after 
the British—to establish before the world the right 
of the Canadian Parliament to make war without 
regard to any action of the British government. But 
the great majority of Canadians did not consider 
this a blow at either Britain or the Commonwealth. 
They felt then, as they do now, that their independent 
existence is best guaranteed within the Common- 
wealth. Some Canadians, indeed, believe there is 
greater freedom in the time-tested ties with Britain 
than in a dependence on the United States which 
might ultimately transform Canada into an append: 
age of its mighty neighbor. Moreover, many 
feel that the aspirations of small nations to play 4 
part in the post-war world are given more sympi 
thetic attention in London than in Washington. But 
the majority of Canadians—and they are represented 
both by Prime Minister Mackenzie King and Oppo- 
sition Leader John Bracken—see no inconsistency 
in the maintenance of existing bonds with Britain 
and the Commonwealth while closer political and 
economic relations are forged with the United 
States.* 

ECONOMIC TIES BIND DOMINIONS. Apatt 
from traditional ties, the most important element if 
the attitude not only of Canada but of the othet 


*See ‘““What a g Think About Post-War Reconstruction, 
Policy Report, March 1, 1943. 





’* Foreigh 











cai 


C0! 





INS 
| War, 
ward 
iment 
Zainst 
after 
right 
ithout 
+. But 
rsider 
ealth. 
ndent 
1mon- 
ere iS 
ritain 
which 
pend- 
many 
slay a 
ympa- 
n. But 
sented 
Oppo- 
stency 
3ritain 
il and 
Inited 


Apart 
vent if 
other 


’ Poreigh 








——— 
—_— 


Dominions toward the Commonwealth is economic. 
Before 1939 Britain was the world’s greatest single 
market for foodstuffs and raw materials, and the 
prosperity of the Dominions, as exporters of primary 
products, largely depended on exchange of these 
products for British manufactures. Although the 
Dominions’ wartime industrialization will make 
them less dependent on British industry and seri- 
ously undermine the Ottawa Agreements, it will 
hardly reduce their need for the British market. 
There is certainly no sign that the United States will 
want to replace Britain in this respect. And, in the 
case of Canada, its new position as a creditor with 
respect to Britain will quite possibly serve to increase 
rather than decrease imports from Britain. 


The problem of Commonwealth security also sug- 
gests that old ties will not be broken even if new 
ones are added. With air power almost certain to 
supplement sea power in guarding British trade 
routes, the strategic unity of the Commonwealth is 
more likely to be tightened than loosened. The pos- 
sible implications of the Commonwealth Air Train- 
ing scheme now under way in Canada should not be 
overlooked in this connection, nor should the fact 
that the British government's policy in the field of 
commercial air transport is being discussed with the 
Dominions before negotiations are opened with 
other United Nations. 


In the Southwest Pacific, it is true, Australia and 


THE F.P.A. 


History of the English-Speaking Peoples, by R. B. Mowat 
and Preston Slosson. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1943. $4.00 
An interesting, and on the whole successful, attempt by 

an American and a British historian to write a one-volume 
history of the English-speaking nations—Britain, the Em- 
pire-Commonwealth and the United States. The purpose 
has not been to give the details of national history but 
rather to emphasize the development of institutions and 
traditions, and to show historically that the bond of unity 
between the American and British peoples is not racial but 
in part one of language, and even more of common institu- 
tions and ideals. 





British Rule in Eastern Asia, by Lennox A. Milles. Minne- 
apolis, University of Minnesota, 1942. $5.00 
A detailed comparative study of political and economic 
conditions in Hongkong and British Malaya before Pearl 
Harbor. 


Mexican Oil, by Harlow S. Person. New York, Harper, 
1942. $1.50 
A matter-of-fact description of the origin and settlement 
of the Mexican oil dispute, with a useful chapter on Mex- 
io’s historical background, by a member of the staff of 
the 1942 U.S.-Mexican Oil Commission. 


Page Three 














New Zealand will probably look more and more to 
the United States for their security. But this does 
not mean that either will wish to sever connections 
with Britain. Canada has long recognized that in the 
last resort its security depended on the United States 
rather than Britain, but this has not reduced its de- 
sire to remain within the Commonwealth. It may 
be similarly expected that the Australasian Domin- 
ions—and also the Union of South Africa—will want 
to add American support to British, not to replace 
Britain by the United States. In the Dominions, as 
well as in Britain, it is expected that the effect of 
closer economic and military ties with the United 
States will not be to loosen the bonds of the Com- 
monwealth but rather to draw the Commonwealth 
as a whole closer to the United States. 

But the Dominions, apparently, do not contem- 
plate a common foreign policy with Britain. What 
they undoubtedly hope is that the issues of war and 
peace will be settled through a genuine international 
body—with responsibilities divided regionally— 
while they themselves determine other aspects of © 
their external affairs in harmony, so far as possible, 
with both Britain and the United States. In an age 
when large political and economic units will almost 
certainly form the prevailing pattern, this concept of 
democratic association appears to be a realistic ap- 
proach to the problems of world organization. 


HowaArD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


BOOKSHELF 


Admiral Sims & The Modern American Navy, by Elting 
E. Morison. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1942. $5.00 


A good biography of Sims’ early career and his influence 
on modernizing the navy. A bit disappointing on his war 
service in Britain, and makes him a greater prophet than 
he was or claimed to be. 


Lifelines of Victory, by Murray Harris. New York, Put- 
nam, 1942. $2.00 
A British squadron leader discusses the problems of war 
strategy with especial stress on the importance of secure 
and adequate transport facilities for successful offensive 
action. 


A Diplomatic History of the American People, by Thomas 
A. Bailey. 2nd Edition, New York, Crofts, 1942. $6.00 
First revision of an excellent and readable volume. Two 

new chapters have been added on the United States and 

the present war, sharply revealing the degree to which the 
war had involved us before we realized it. 


I Remember, I Remember, by André Maurois. New York, 
Harper, 1942. $3.00 
Through this fascinating story of a rich life runs a 
bright thread of philosophy that represents France at 
its best. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 29, May 7, 1943 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Verna MicHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Sis: 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





8 2 cpap 


ee 


—_ 


7 a ~ ‘ x 
See eer wa eT cee le ig eae Soe Sep cea sane eed ea 


élite ee 
Te ae ety SE 


aon 


pMEsie sy 


oa Se 


ss Bete 


ths ih oe om 


pra Aare + vemene wal 


Tt a re ll So a a ey 








Washington News Letter 








f 








May 3.—President Roosevelt's handling of the 
present coal crisis will go a long way toward supply- 
ing an affirmative answer to the moot question of 
whether a democracy is capable of waging a suc- 
cessful war. For it must be remembered that World 
War II is an ideological as well as a military con- 
flict, and the decision of John L. Lewis to order the 
miners back to work for two weeks means that the 
President has won the first round. But it is not yet 
clear whether this is a tactical maneuver on Mr. 
Lewis’ part, or whether it signifies that he is trying 
to save face—realizing that he cannot successfully 
defy the government of his country in time of war. 
But Mr. Roosevelt in his radio address indicated that 
he intends to yield nothing to Mr. Lewis’ threats and, 
if the President adheres unflinchingly to this line, he 
will have furnished a vindication of our democratic 
institutions. 

NAZIS RIDICULE DEMOCRACY. The rise of 
Fascism was due in part to the belief that only a 
strongly authoritarian government could conduct a 
victorious war. In Germany, especially, a careful 
study had been made of the political and military 
mistakes committed by the Reich in the war of 
1914-18. Nazi leaders were persuaded that strikes 
in the German munition plants in the last years 
of that conflict, as well as the pacifist outlook 
of many German labor leaders, had contributed 
gteatly to the downfall of the Kaiser’s govern- 
ment, not only by reducing the output of war ma- 
tériel but by lowering morale on the home front. 
It is not surprising, therefore, that one of Hitler’s 
first steps on becoming master of the Reich in 1933 
was to abolish all trade unions and replace them by a 
government-controlled agency. Workers and employ- 
ers alike were subjected to government supervision, 
and strikes and lock-outs were forbidden. The same 
policy, with a somewhat different technique, had 
previously been carried out in Italy. In two other 
powers that have subsequently become belligerent 
nations, the U.S.S.R. and Japan, the authority of the 
state is also supreme, and in neither of these coun- 
tries are industrial conflicts tolerated. 


The present war has provided a searching, prag- 
matic test for the political institutions of three great 
democracies, Britain, France, and the United States. 
Under the strain of battle the Third Republic failed 
utterly, and its rapid and unexpected collapse seemed 
to confirm the prophecies of men like Dr. Joseph 
Goebbels as to the inadequacies of the democratic 


FOR VICTORY ° 


form of government in the modern world. 

The sad truth, of course, was that the French Re 
public was in no shape to face such a test. The out 
break of hostilities found France on the brink of 4 
civil war. The bitter struggles between labor and 
capital, which reached a climax in the advent tp 
power of the Popular Front in 1936 and the crop of 
“sit-down” strikes of that year, had split the French 
people asunder as they had never been divided since 
the Revolution. Although the Daladier Cabinet with 
a display of unwonted energy had quickly suppressed 
an attempt at a general strike in December 1938, the 
many ephemeral French ministries had never been 
able to regulate satisfactorily relations between work. 
ers and management. 

VICHY HAD DOUBTS. The weaknesses of the 
Third Republic led Marshal Pétain and his collab. 
orators in the Vichy government to ascribe the fall 
of France to its democratic institutions. They sought 
to establish an authoritarian régime, and doubted the 
ability of the United States either to save England 
or secure the liberation of France. The epidemic of 
strikes that occurred in the United States in 1941 
strengthened Vichy in the belief that President Roose. 
velt would be unable to deliver the goods in time. 

In striking contrast to France, British political in 
stitutions have withstood the ordeal of war. Unlike 
French labor, British labor was not seriously af 
fected by the Communist dogma of 1939 that this 
was an imperialist war, and had enough patriotism 
and sense of responsibility to prevent war production 
from being impeded by strikes. After the entrance of 
the United States in the war, outstanding labor lead. 
ers of this country, too, such as President William 
Green of the A. F. of L., President Philip Murray 
of the CIO, and John Lewis of the United Mine 
Workers, solemnly promised that they would call 
no strikes for the duration. 

Mr. Lewis’ breach of his pledge threatened nol 


only to jeopardize production of vital war goods ant! 


open the door to inflation, in the event his move 
proved successful, but also to discredit the future of 
democracy in Europe. For whether this form of gov 
ernment will be revived on the Continent after the 
war depends in large part on how it functions if 
the United States and Britain. It will not be enough 
for the western democracies to win the war—the 
must show that in doing so they know how to com 
bine liberty with authority. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 











