


ican 
Aus- 
DOS- 
ieve 
and 
me 
pre. 
ions 
pite 
Sive 
\tici- 
Vor- 
Rus- 
rial, 
ited 


ants, 
eeds | 
hief 
Ger- 
ious- 
tates 
, the 





hich | 


with | 
ently 
ma: | 
rts, 
1 Can 
from \ 
than | 
antic 
gton | 
vard: | 
it is 
r all-| 
re it 
offec- 


AN 





Dr. William ¥. 


*~ University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


2 = 
eL5u0D 


t 
De Entered as 2nd class matter 


FEB 12 1942 


FOREIGN _POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 15 


JANUARY 30, 1942 





RIO CONFERENCE ACHIEVES LIMITED AMERICAN UNITY 


he compromise formula adopted on January 26 
by the Foreign Ministers of the twenty-one Amer- 
ican republics assembled at Rio de Janeiro—recom- 
mending but not requiring a diplomatic rupture 
with the Axis — indicates not that inter-American 
unity is impossible but that it can only be achieved 
slowly and with tremendous effort. The intransigence 
of the Argentine government, which had tentatively 
agreed to the stronger form only to repudiate it later, 
proved in the end the decisive factor at the confer- 
ence. The developments causing the Argentine about- 
face have not yet been disclosed. There seems to be 
no doubt, however, that it was facilitated by a rash 
statement of Senator Tom Connally, Chairman of 
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, suggesting 
that the people of Argentina might change their 
President if he did not change his policies. 


UNITY WON — AT A PRICE. Confronted by 
this disappointing situation, the North American 
tepresentatives were forced to choose between a de- 


| natured resolution unanimously adopted, and a more 


decided stand which would split the hemisphere 
into two blocs. They chose formal unity. At the 
same time, a number of countries began individually 
to take the action recommended by the Rio meet- 
ing. By January 27 Peru, Uruguay, Bolivia and Para- 


| guay had joined the thirteen other American repub- 


lics which had severed diplomatic relations with the 
Axis. It was believed that Brazil, Ecuador and pos- 
sibly Chile would shortly thereafter follow suit. 

For his part, Acting President Ramon S. Castillo 
flatly stated on January 24 that Argentina would not 
break off relations. Nevertheless, the Argentine gov- 
ernment is adopting a series of less drastic but simi- 
lar measures, probably in order to assure Argentine 
participation in the economic benefits of hemisphere 
cooperation. The Argentine Ambassador to Berlin 
has been recalled to Buenos Aires to report to his 


government, while Edmund von Thermann, Ger- 
man Ambassador in the Argentine capital, is about 
to leave the country for what it is understood will 
be a permanent absence. Restrictions have been 
placed on the movements of all funds to non- 
American countries; a symbolic campaign has been 
initiated against local German leaders and the na- 
tive fascist newspaper E/ Pampero; and the govern- 
ment has expressed willingness to supervise the ac- 
tivities of economic enterprises directly controlled by 
Axis subjects. Whether these limited moves are 
more than superficial gestures cannot yet be deter- 
mined. Before Argentina is permitted to share the 
full benefits of hemisphere economic interchange, 
however, they should be carefully scrutinized and 
guarantees of their extension secured. With the 
overwhelming majority of the Latin American re- 
publics cooperating to the utmost in the common 
defense, Argentina should not be allowed to run 
with the hare and hunt with the hounds. 


PROGRESS ON ECONOMIC FRONT. The ac- 
rimony engendered by political differences at the 
Rio de Janeiro conference ought not to obscure the 
real advances in collaboration made on other fronts. 
Aside from certain military arrangements, and com- 
mitments to control subversive Axis activities—in 
which agreement is not necessarily synonymous with 
execution—the most important resolutions deal with 
vital economic questions. One recommends the sev- 
erance of all commercial and financial intercourse 
with the aggressor nations, with provision for super- 
vising or seizing Axis-controlled commercial enter- 
prises. Another declaration calls for cooperation to 
increase the production of strategic materials. Still 
another provides for the coordination of inter- 
American shipping services, including sanction for 
the immediate utilization of the many Axis mer- 
chantmen hitherto immobilized in various ports of 








_—e— 
—_—_-e- 








the hemisphere. A plan has also been prepared for 
determining and filling the civilian import require- 
ments of the Latin American republics, at reason- 
able prices, by allocating United States materials on 
a proportionate basis with civilian supply here. 

These resolutions, when put into effect by specific 
arrangements, will serve as the vital sinews of Pan- 
American cooperation as long as hostilities continue. 
That they are no mere pious hopes was indicated 
by the disclosure, on January 25, of agreements be- 
tween the United States and sixteen Latin American 
republics—all except Ecuador and the ABC powers, 
whose adhesion was expected later—for mutual sus- 
pension of all tariff and trade barriers which might 
impede a maximum productive effort for the dura- 
tion of the war. (It is perhaps significant that the 
non-signatory states are those still maintaining rela- 
tions with the Axis.) A similar arrangement between 
Canada and the United States, recommended by the 
Joint War Production Committee of the two coun- 
tries, had received the approval of President Roose- 
velt and the Canadian War Cabinet in December 
1941. The Latin American agreements are only a 
segment of a comprehensive program worked out 
in Washington to integrate and expand hemisphere 
production. Other provisions include measures to 

eliminate foreign exchange difficulties as betweea 
~ all anti-Axis countries; pool all resources in a com- 
mon stockpile of war materials; nationalize ail air 
lines; and utilize American capital and s!-i!led labor 
for developing hemisphere production. 


This economic plan, if carried out on a he.1ui- 
sphere scale, could hardly be summarily discontin- 
ued at the close of the war. Instead, it would repre- 
sent a long step toward construction of a perma- 
nent inter-American collective system, especially if 
the states refusing to collaborate in measures against 
aggressor nations were barred from its benefits. 
Since all Latin American republics preserve a lively 


Page Two 





i 
——<—<——, 





recollection of the crude economic imperialism of 
the United States in earlier years, it is not to be ey. 
pected that the project will win complete and in 
mediate acceptance. It is far more likely to com, 
into existence gradually, under the stress of the war. 
time emergency. 


IMPORTANCE OF NONINTERVENTION. | 
the view of some commentators, the failure to reach 
accord on the full United States program at Rio & 
Janeiro is a natural consequence of our past refus, 
to strengthen democratic, pro-Allied forces in th 
Latin American countries themselves. It is true tha 
this country has in recent years dealt with whateye 
governments were in power in the states of the 
hemisphere, no matter what their composition. This 
policy cannot, however, be condemned out of han 
as pernicious “appeasement.” It must be remem 
bered that in large areas of South America, pro 
democratic forces are still in a rudimentary stage 
with little mass support. Where that is the case 
nothing but turmoil would be produced by a shoy 
of favoritism on our part. In an emergency period 
when Latin America is most valuable to the wa 
effort as a source of supply, turmoil could be fatal 

Any suspicion of a North American attempt ti 
force a change in a Latin American government 
moreover, would destroy at once the hard-won bene 





fits of nine years of our non-intervention polig 
throughout the Americas. With the help of Axi 
propaganda agents, such interference would k 
fanned into a blazing fear of United States imperial 
ism that might dwarf all concern for the conflict is 
Europe. Undoubtedly, Latin American states whic 
do not cooperate with the Allies should be excluded 
from the advantages of inter-American wartime 
agreements. But, as Senator Connally’s unfortunate 
statement proves, the utmost delicacy must be em 





ployed to avoid political interference with their do 
mestic affairs. Davin H. Popper 


JAPAN’S TWO-PRONGED DRIVE THREATENS BURMA, AUSTRALIA 


As the Japanese campaign moves into its eighth 
week, Japan’s offensive operations have now been 
extended to cover an arc 5,000 miles in length, 
stretching from Burma to New Guinea. At some 
points on this arc the Japanese supply lines are 





Your Men in the Army and Navy 


will value F.P.A. publications. Take advantage of 
special rates for Service Men. Send them the 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN and 
HEADLINE BOOKS — $3.00 a year 


or the 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN — $2.00 a year 


Send your subscriptions to the Foreign Policy Association, 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 











3,000 miles long. The two main Japanese drives-| 
the western one pushing toward the Indian Ocean) 
the eastern, toward Australasia — are designed 1 
prevent Allied reinforcements from reaching not onl) 
the Indies but also Malaya and Australia. Meat 


while, the Japanese hope to reduce the Philippine) 


and, above all, Singapore, the bolt which fastens th 
back door to the British Empire. 


INVASION OF BURMA. Symbolic of this move 
ment is the campaign against Burma. This Britis) 
colony, separated from India in 1937, is an impo! 
tant producer of tungsten, silver, lead and petrolt 
um. From its northern extremity the Burma Roat 
China’s life line, stretches 726 miles to Kunminj 
In September 1941, when the Burmese governmet 











— 


Mm of 
e ex. 
1 im. 
CcOme 


N. In 
reach 
10 de 


1 the 
: thai 
tever 


hand 
mem. 
pto- 
stage 
Case 
show 
riod 
Wat 
fatal 
pt ty 
ment 
bene. 
lig 
Axi 
1 bh 
erial: 
ict if 
vhich 
uded 
rtime! 
anatt/ 


r do 


i 





ER 


ves— | 
cean 

-d ‘ 
- only 
Aeas: 

pine) 
isthe! 


nove 
ritisl 
npor 
trole 
Road 
nin} 
meni 








ee, 
—_—_ 





abolished a one per cent ad valorem duty levied 
against supplies transported on the road, it appeared 
to recognize the importance of full cooperation with 
the Chinese war effort. The Prime Minister of 
Burma, U Saw, then paid a visit to London to ob- 
tain a promise of Dominion status for his country 
of 15,000,000 people. When Mr. Leopold S. Amery, 
Secretary of State for India and Burma, assured him 
only that Britain would help Burma advance as 
speedily as possible toward this status, U Saw de- 
scribed his visit as “‘unsatisfactory” and hinted that 
other powers might have more to offer. After the 
Japanese and Thai troops launched their attack 
against Burma, the British announced that U Saw 
(probably in Cairo en route to his home) had been 
arrested for conspiring with the Japanese. Since 
Burma had unexpectedly become a key point in the 
struggle for the Far East, the British authorities 
did not dare risk his return. 

In a swift attack on January 19 the Japanese and 
Thai troops began their Burma campaign by seiz- 
ing Tavoy, an air base about 350 miles southeast of 
Rangoon. A second attack, 170 miles to the north, 
was directed at Moulmein, an important seaport. 
The invaders were temporarily checked at the Daw- 
na mountains, but soon succeeded in reaching the 
Salween river which flows southward to Moulmein. 
The threat to the Burma Road, only 200 miles to 
the north, is so great that Chinese troops have 
marched 1,000 miles to reinforce the British in Burma 
and perhaps to open another front on the Thai 
northern frontier. 

Rangoon, strengthened by Imperial troops during 
the past two months, has frequently been raided 
without great success. Here the Japanese bombers 
have met their match in the American Tomahawks, 
Curtiss P-40’s and Buffalo fighter planes. R.A.F. 
pilots and American volunteers destroyed 36 enemy 
aircraft in two days, although outnumbered four to 
one. This is an impressive record and indicates what 
the United Nations could achieve with air superior- 
ity. The Japanese purpose is to cut off the Burma 
Road, seize the supplies of oil, forestall a British 
offensive to relieve Singapore, and open a route to 
India, arsenal of Middle Asia. 


AUSTRALIA ENDANGERED. At the other end 
of the Malayan-Dutch East Indies front, Australians 
fought to keep an invader from the mainland for 
the first time in history. Japanese landings at Rabaul, 
former capital of the Mandated Territory of New 
Guinea, and at Kieta threatened the United States 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: THE FRUITS OF 
GOOD NEIGHBORLINESS 
Speaker: James G. McDonald, former F.P.A. Chairman 
Date: Sunday, February 1 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over Blue Network 
For station, please consult your local newspaper 











supply route through Torres Strait (north of Aus- 
tralia) and presaged an invasion of the continent 
itself. Australian dissatisfaction with the conduct of 
the war, which had been simmering for some 
months, flared into the open as the Japanese drove 
deeper into the South Pacific. Bitterly disappointed 
by British unpreparedness in the Malayan campaign, 
Prime Minister John Curtin bluntly announced in 
December that his government would look to Amer- 
ica, “free from any pangs about . . .traditional links 
of friendship to Britain.” Believing that its own po- 
sition is threatened partly because of its all-out ef- 
fort to aid Britain, Australia issued two appeals for 
more planes and ships. The government demanded the 
creation of a Pacific Council and an Imperial War 
Cabinet. Prime Minister Curtin observed that crea- 
tion of such a Cabinet would mean the Dominions 
would no longer be without a voice in the determina- 
tion of defense and diplomatic problems. On Janu- 
ary 27 Winston Churchill stated to the House of 
Commons that Australia and the other Dominions 
would be granted representation in the British War 
Cabinet, and that President Roosevelt would propose 
the formation of a Pacific Council. 

If the Japanese should invade Australia, Ameri- 
can ships might be forced to make a 5,000-mile de- 
tour south of Australia to Java. If, however, the 
promised reinforcements for the navy, air force, and 
home defense army of 250,000 reach Australia in 
time, the United Nations may be able to make a de- 
termined stand to hold this vital base. 

MarGARET LA Foy 
GENERAL McCOY RETURNS 

The Foreign Policy Association is pleased to an- 
nounce that its President, Major General Frank Ross 
McCoy, has successfully completed his work with 
the Roberts Commission at Pearl Harbor, and has 
returned to active duty with the Association. 





Volcanic Isle, by Wilfred Fleisher. Garden City, Doubleday 
Doran, 1941. $3.00 
Facts and opinions on Japan from a journalist and news- 
paper editor with a quarter-century’s experience of its 
people and its politics. A readable and stimulating treat- 
ment of recent developments in Japanese history and 
politics. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 15, January 30, 1942. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Secretary; Vera MicHeLes DEAN, Editor; Davin H. Poppsr, Associate Editor. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


> 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Wii.1aM P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dornotuy F. Lager, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


Incorporated. National 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 

















JAN. 26.—Repercussions of the report presented 
by the Pearl Harbor investigating commission, pub- 
lished on January 25, are likely to extend well be- 
yond the disciplinary measures which may be taken 
with res to Admiral Kimmel and Lieutenant 
General Short, upon whom the commission pinned 
primary responsibility. Whatever may have been the 
mistakes and shortcomings of the past, it is clear 
that they cannot be undone. Attention is therefore 
now centered on the question of what lessons may 
be learned from the disaster to prevent its repetition, 
and, at the same time, to maximize the efficiency of 
America’s war effort. 


UNIFIED OR JOINT DEFENSE COMMANDS? 
The committee’s disclosures illustrate very clearly 
the deficiencies of joint control by two separate 
Army and Navy commands with equal responsibility, 
as against a system in which responsibility and di- 
rection are unified. A comprehensive, joint coastal 
frontier-defense plan for meeting an emergency or 
war situation had been worked out by the Army and 
Navy staffs in Hawaii long before December 7, but 
application of the measures depended on the issu- 
ance of the necessary orders for the “alerts.” Al- 
though Admiral Kimmel and General Short had re- 
ceived, on November 24 and 27, respectively, an 
official warning from Washington that hostilities on 
the part of Japan were momentarily possible, they 
did not confer together with reference to what ac- 
tion this warning might require. Each assumed that 
the other was taking precautionary measures. The 
assumptions proved to be false. It is certain that 
prompt consideration should now be given to the 
question of continuing divided responsibility not 
only in Hawaii, but at defense outposts in other 
overseas possessions as well as along the continental 
coasts. Whether the same principle of unified con- 
trol should be extended to Washington by the crea- 
tion of a single-headed Department of National De- 
fense, or a united military and naval command, to 
comprise the existing War and Navy Departments, 
is a more difficult question which, in time of peace 
has always been met with a storm of opposition in 
both armed services. The Pearl Harbor report, touch- 
ing on the question in a more limited manner, and 
the firm conviction that the magnitude of the task 
ahead must not be hampered by bureaucratic tradi 
tionalism, present the issue to Washington official- 
dom and to the public at large in a new and urgent 
form. 


THE PLAGUE OF COMPLACENCY. The 
tragic shortcomings at Pearl Harbor cannot relieye 
the country and the government of their own share 
in the responsibility. Despite the admonitions voiced 
occasionally by those who understood the full im. 
port of Axis techniques, it was too widely assumed 
that no enemy would ever dare to attack us directly 
The conviction held by the responsible commanders 
and their subordinates in Oahu (as attested by the 
Roberts report), that Japan neither could nor would 
undertake a surprise air raid on the island base, js| 
therefore not so surprising when viewed in the large: 
context of American apathy. 

More important now is the fact that, despite the 
shock of Pearl Harbor and the instantaneous gen. 
eration of a nationally unified will to fight, the mood 
of complacency has by no means disappeared. Wash- 
ington circles are disturbed by this situation and 
fear that months of fruitless ‘‘sky-watching’’ may 
develop a lack of alertness on the part of armed 
forces and the public alike, or that Axis setbacks in 
Russia or in the Pacific may dull appreciation of the 
magnitude of the all-out offensive which may be 
expected from the Axis this spring and summer. To 
prepare now to meet that offensive is as vitally : 
part of the war effort as to plan our own offensive at 
the appropriate time. 


REVIVAL OF OLD FEUDS? One reaction in 
Congressional circles to the Pearl Harbor report 
which is causing some concern is indicated in a 
Statement issued to the press by Senator David | 
Walsh of Massachusetts, who before December 7 
was frequently referred to as an “‘isolationist.” In | 
his statement, Senator Walsh implied that the in- | 
adequacy of the defense forces in the Pacific might | 
have been due to concentrations in the Atlantic area. | 
The Senator doubtless had reference to the convoy 
and patrol work which American naval and aerial | 
units were performing to insure the shipment of | 
lend-lease materials to Britain. A statement issued 
on January 26 by Senator Wayland Brooks, Repub: | 
lican of Illinois, raised the question even more ex- 
plicitly. Since the outbreak of war, the bitter feud 
between the aid-the-Allies camp and the America 
First supporters has almost vanished, but these and 
other signs indicate that it may yet revive in a some- 
what different form. There are also intimations that / 
Republicans in Congress might raise the general | 
issue of efficiency in the conduct of the war. 


WILLIAM P. Mappox 














VoL. ° 


AS 
times 
dema 
Mala 
and | 
of WN 
Gern 
conti 
like 
confi 
stabi 
Ye 
trenc 
ary 3 
althc 
Russ 
the ] 
to hi 
Unit 
enen 
with 
N 
cult 
une} 
the 
wou 
strik 
join 
bod: 
Jam 
Chu 
of ¢ 
of « 
mit 
Sep. 
fro 
and 


had 





