


the 





p 
¥ 


i 
Pe 


MAR 15 1944 


Pera) 2. Entered as 2nd class matter 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vout. XXIII, No. 20 


Marcu 8, 1944 





= curtain of Anglo-American official silence on 
foreign affairs that had grown increasingly im- 
enetrable since the Teheran Conference was only 
partially lifted by Mr. Churchill in his report to Par- 
liament on February 22. The bulk of this report was, 
understandably, devoted to a summation of the mil- 
itary progress of the United Nations, with special 
emphasis on Britain’s contribution to the common ef- 
fort, and on the difficulties that must be surmounted 
) before Germany’s military power is crushed. In touch- 
| ing on some of the political problems of conquered 
Europe that have threatened to divide Britain, Russia 
and the United States, Mr. Churchill expressed the 
policy of his government in the following formula: 
“Our feelings . . . follow the principle of keeping 
good faith with those who have kept good faith with 
us, and of striving without prejudice or regard for 
political affections to aid those who strike for free- 
' dom against the Nazi rule and inflict the greatest 
injury upon the enemy.” 

The yardstick, apparently, is to be military effort, 








not ideology. But, since the firmest and most con- 
' sistent resistance to the Nazis has come from those 

who are opposed to Nazi ideas and practices, this 
yardstick would make it possible for Britain to col- 
laborate with individuals and groups who may not, 
at this moment, enjoy official recognition. This has 
already proved the case with respect to Marshal Tito 


) in Yugoslavia, to whom Mr. Churchill paid an un- 


_ usually warm tribute, while at the same time say- 
ing: “we cannot dissociate ourselves in any way” 
from King Peter. Reports that Captain Randolph 
Churchill, son of the Prime Minister, is now at Tito’s 
headquarters, and that King Peter has asked the 
British to facilitate his return to London for consul- 

_ tations and to shake off the influence of reactionary 
elements in his entourage may point in the direction 
of some compromise between the King and Tito. 

A somewhat similar development, although 


WILL EXPEDIENCY ALONE DETERMINE ALLIED POLICY IN EUROPE? 


couched in a different form, may result from the un- 
resolved controversy over Poland. Here Moscow's 
insistence on the creation of a Polish government 
friendly to Russia; Britain’s desire to find a workable 
basis for collaboration with Russia in postwar Eu- 
rope; and the persisting intransigence of the con- 
servative nationalist elements in the Polish govern- 
ment-in-exile concerning the Curzon Line, which 
has Britain’s approval—all play an important part. 
Should a shake-up now occur in official Polish 
circles, and should a reorganized cabinet collab- 
orate with Russia in common resistance against 
Germany, the British would presumably give such a 
régime their support. But if no change takes place 
among the Poles in London, and meanwhile the Pol- 
ish underground opposes the Germans at the side of 
Russia, as the Partisans are doing in Yugoslavia, then 
it is not inconceivable that the British might even- 
tually give such aid as they can to a resistance move- 
ment in Poland, without openly abandoning the Po- 
lish government-in-exile which has kept “good faith” 
with Britain to the extent of its practical ability. 
BRITAIN KEEPS DOORS OPEN. The political 
situation inside Europe is so fluid that it is entirely 
natural for Britain to keep open as many doors to the 
future as possible. This was the burden of Anthony 
Eden’s speech in the House of Commons on Febru- 
ary 23, when he said that the British government re- 
serves the right to intervene in the settlement of po- 
litical affairs in any part of Europe, but that the ob- 
ject of its foreign policy is to maintain peace and the 
rights of small nations with the aid of the British 
Commonwealth of Nations, Russia and the United 
States. Moreover, the fact—pointed out by Mr. 
Churchill—that the British, in contrast to the first 
two years of war, can no longer speak for themselves 
alone, but must consider the interests and plans of 
their allies, imposes a real limitation on their power 
of initiative. The Churchill and Eden speeches, how- 











© ah anne ae 











ever, reveal two ominous trends—ominous because, 
if they develop, and are allowed to have a decisive 
influence on the peace settlement, they may undo 
the results of military victory. 

OMINOUS TRENDS. The first of these trends 
is the almost contemptuous attitude displayed by Mr. 
Churchill toward the six political parties of Italy 
that have been striving to create a basis for a non- 
Fascist régime. This attitude is justified by the British 
Prime Minister on the ground that the Italian parties 
do not command military force, while Badoglio and 
King Victor Emmanuel can presumably place some 
armed strength at the disposal of the allies; and a 
vague promise is given that “it is from Rome that a 
more broadly based government can best be formed.” 
It is understandable that, in the midst of the arduous 
and bloody struggle for Italian beachheads, the Al- 
lies do not want to precipitate political controversies 
about Italy’s future. But the controversies do exist, 
and they cannot be merely brushed aside without cre- 
ating the impression in Italy—and elsewhere—that 
Britain and the United States are indifferent to the 
fundamental struggle between fascism and anti-fas- 
cism which has unleashed this war, and may survive 
it unless the roots of fascism are destroyed. Nor is it 
clear that such military assistance as Badoglio and 
King Victor Emmanuel can guarantee to the Allies— 
and American sources would indicate that it is both 
slight and apathetic except for the Italian Navy— 
will counterbalance the disillusionment and disaffec- 
tion left in the wake of Allied invasion. Even more 
important, if the policy followed by Britain and the 
United States in Italy is a token of what the Allies 
plan to do in defeated Germany, then there will be 
little hope of destroying the power of the military and 
conservative elements which perpetuated the semifeu- 
dal social structure of Germany after World War I. 

The second ominous trend is the admission, in Mr. 


= Page Two 








———_ 


Churchill’s speech, that the dismemberment of Ge. 
many might offer a way of reconciling some of th 
existing or impending divergences among the United 
Nations. Russia set the scene for this developmen 
in its note broadcast on January 11 regarding Eag. 
ern Poland, when it said that the Poles could com. 
pensate themselves for territory ceded to Russia 

taking East Prussia and parts of Silesia. It is entirely 
arguable, as Mr. Eden stated, that the provisions of 
the Atlantic Charter are not applicable to Germany, 
But it is difficult to see how the dismemberment of 
Germany would contribute to the pacification and t¢. 
construction of Europe, especially if, meanwhile, the 
Allies take no steps—as unfortunately appears to be 
the case—toward the formation of an international 





organization within which post-war Germany could 


develop along constructive lines of collaboration with | 
its neighbors, instead of destructive lines of resurgent | 


nationalism. 

It is the political, rather than the military, prognos. 
tications of Mr. Churchill that give his report a note 
of gloom which is absent from the realistic, but 
jubilant and confident order of the day issued by 
Stalin on February 23, announcing the liberation of 
three-quarters of Russia’s invaded territory. Victory 
over Germany will prove arduous and costly. This 
both Churchill and Stalin admit. But the real test 
will come when victory has been achieved. This test 
will have to be met not only with the anxiety over 
possible political and economic upheavals which 
seems to mark the policy of Britain and the United 
States, but with a firm resolution to build an effective 
international organization on the foundations of war- 
time collaboration between the United Nations. 
Otherwise the “unfinished business’ of 1919, as 
Stephen Bonsal calls it, will remain to be finished by 
yet another world war. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


LATEST ARGENTINE COUP WIDENS BREACH WITH UNITED STATES 


The Argentine coup d'état which was climaxed by 
the enforced resignation of President Pedro Ramirez 
on February 25 has left great political confusion in 
its wake. The outside observer has lacked authorita- 
tive reports—indeed, whether the resignation fol- 
lowed any legal pattern is still in question—and it 
may be assumed that the Argentine people are equal- 
ly confused. They have been subjected for some time 
to strict censorship regulations and have had less 
and less participation in government affairs, particu- 
larly since June 1943 when General Ramirez succeed- 
ed to the Presidency in a coup which ousted Ramén S. 
Castillo. In fact there has been an increasing tenden- 
cy toward an executive dictatorship since 1940, when 
Castillo became Acting President in place of Roberto 
Ortiz. 

RECOGNITION IN QUESTION. The Ramirez 











“resignation” justifies the suspended judgment with ' 


which the United States and the other American Re 
publics greeted the Argentine action against Ger 
many and Japan in January. Fearful lest the question 
of recognition of a new government be raised, the 
military junta which elevated former Vice President 
Edelmiro Farrell to the position held by General 
Ramirez contended that the change is but a temporaty 
one and that the President resigned due to illness. 
Under Secretary of State Edward R. Stettinius, Jr. 
however, indicated that the shift involved a possible 
threat to this hemisphere and that consultation with 
the other American Republics would be undertaken. 


But it was not clear from his remarks whether the . 


machinery of the Consultative Committee for the 
Political Defense of the Continent in Montevideo 
would be employed for this purpose, as was done 


cette 


—_——— 





——— 


in th 
At 
sphe! 
lem ¢ 
lic 
fd 
has t 
and 
Spat 
tion 
matt 
men 
Sout 
will 
men 
case 
risif 
icy | 
beet 
the 
an é 
not 
van 
leac 


I 
dra 
in ' 
of 
tak 
Mi 





@onmteeass, f 





ea I 


tt 
ny 


Bs 


om. 
by 
rely 
$ of 
any. 
t of 
1 te. 


0 be 
Onal 
ould 


with 
gent | 


NOS- 
note 


with 
1 Re- 
Ger- 


stion | 


, the 
ident 
neral 


oraty | 


ness. 
» a 
ssible 
with 
aken. 
r the 
r the 
video 
done 




















——— 
EeV7"_™ 


in the case of Bolivia. 

Argentina is a crucial test not only for this hemi- 
sphere but for the United Nations as well. The prob- 
jem of recognition raises broader questions of foreign 
policy involving issues relative to Spain and the 
Badoglio government in Italy. Now that the issue 
has been joined in Argentina, pressure both in Britain 
and the United States for a clearer policy toward 
Spain may be heightened. While there is no indica- 
tion that the State Department will deal with the 
matter thus broadly, a continuance of the Depart- 
ment’s stiffer attitude toward pro-fascist elements in 
South America can be expected. The United States 
will doubtless refuse to recognize the Farrell govern- 
ment, on the basis of the precedent established in the 
case of Bolivia. If a truly broad and democratic up- 
rising should occur in Argentina, our traditional pol- 
icy of nonrecognition on the ground that force had 
been used would presumably be waived in favor of 
the greater desirability of recognizing and supporting 
an anti-Axis régime. Such an eventuality, however, is 
not now anticipated. Rather, we may expect a contin- 
uance of personalized rule by Argentina’s military 
leaders. 


RULE BY MILITARY CLIQUES. The recent 
dramatic events in Argentina are but the latest stroke 


in what is a purely intermilitary struggle for control 
of political power. Within those limits events have 





, taken devious turns. Thus on February 15 Foreign 


Minister Alberto Gilbert and Col. Enrique Gonzales, 
Secretary to the President, were ejected from the gov- 
ernment by an ultra-nationalist young officer’s group 
when it was reported that a declaration of war had 
been prepared by the President and his Foreign Min- 
ister. Rumors of such action, along with rumors of 
civil war, have come repeatedly from Argentina. But 


' those officials who moved too speedily in the direc- 


tion of a final break with the Axis were suspect. Hint- 
ing that such a policy was intended, and having pre- 
pared an announcement of cabinet changes in order 
to liberalize the government, the President had him- 


Page Three 





For a 25-year survey of the foreign policy of the 
Vatican, as well as a record of its relations with 
Italy, Spain, Germany and the U.S.S.R., READ— 
FOREIGN POLICY OF THE VATICAN 
by Sherman S. Hayden 


25c 


January 15 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPoRTS are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 














em 








self reached beyond the limits imposed by the military 
factions. That element of the Army which had ejected 
the Foreign Minister was in turn superseded by the 
ever-powerful GOU (Grupo Oficiales Unidos), ot 
“colonel’s clique,” which has raised General Farrell 
to the Presidency. 

With the inclusion of Col. Juan Domingo Perén 
as Minister of War in the new Farrell cabinet, the 
leader of the GOU has again entered the official gov- 
ernment body. Colonel Perén held the portfolio of 
Labor when the Ramirez régime was openly pro-Axis, 
but was subsequently discarded when, on the eve of 
his resignation, the former President had also ousted 
Gen. Luis Perlinger, Minister of the Interior. It is this 
group of officers, with the aid of Col. Eduardo 
Avalos, commander of the Campo de Mayo barracks 
in the environs of the capitol, that manipulated the 
present coup. Reports that the majority of the Army 
are in sympathy with General Ramirez must await 
developments in the days immediately ahead. Should 
the GOU solidify its hold on the government, the 
Argentine people will endure further military rule 
until the shifting jealousies of the Army factions 
again demand a reshuffle. Under such circumstances, 
the courageous plea for the restoration of freedom 
of the press made by the editors of the famed liberal 
journal, La Prensa, will remain unheard and may 
well endanger their personal security. Not until the 
democratic forces in Argentina are able to overthrow 
the military rulers and re-introduce a constitutional 
régime will such efforts toward popular government 
be rewarded. But if the democratic forces are to 
triumph, they will need the official support of the 
United States and Britain, which they have not had 


in the past. Grant S. MCCLELLAN 





The Captain Wears a Cross, by William A. Maguire. New 
York, Macmillan, 1943. $2.00 
My Fighting Congregation, by William C. Taggart. New 
York, Doubleday, Doran, 1943. $2.00 
In view of the vital work being done by Catholic, Jewish 
and Protestant chaplains all over the fighting fronts and 
the camps, these two interesting books are worth reading. 
The first carries on Father Maguire’s story of Pearl Har- 
bor and of his life as a naval chaplain. Mr. Taggart’s tells 
of his experiences with the U.S. Army Air Forces in the 
Southwest Pacific. 


Spain, by Salvadore de Madariaga. New York, Creative 

Age Press, 1943. $4.00 

One of the most dispassionate and informative studies 
of the causes and course of the Spanish Civil War that has 
appeared. The author criticizes both sides in the Revolu- 
tion and contends that Franco’s victory resulted in large 
part from the failure of the Republicans to present a 
united front. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 20, MarcH 3, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


, Headquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Donotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micneres Duan, Béitor. Eavered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


ris 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 














SS 








Washington News Letter 














Fes. 28.—The State Department during World 
War I had 530 employees; in 1937 it had 850; now 
it has 2,500. Its expansion in the past seven critical 
years has been erratic, with responsibilities fuzzily 
divided. For example, the former Chief of the Divi- 
sion of International Communications was respon- 
sible to Assistant Secretary Adolph A. Berle, Jr., for 
matters relating to aviation; to Assistant Secretary 
Breckinridge Long for shipping; and to Assistant 
Secretary G. Howland Shaw for telecommunications. 
Assistant Secretary Berle was in charge of interna- 
tional financial affairs, but Assistant Secretary Dean 
Acheson of international economic affairs. Berle 
supervised the issuance of passports, Long the issu- 
ance of visas. The Translating Division and the Cul- 
tural Relations Division were responsible directly to 
the Under Secretary but, busy with grave political 
questions, the Under Secretary could give them little 
attention. 


STATE DEPARTMENT REORGANIZED. The 
Department was reorganized on January 15 to elim- 
inate the inefficiency that grew out of its unwieldy, 
shapeless construction. Jurisdictional overlappings 
were removed, and the responsibilities of the Assis- 
tant Secretaries were clearly defined: Berle got Con- 
trols, Transportation and Communications; Acheson, 
Economic Affairs; Long, Congressional Relations; 
and Shaw, Administration and Public Information. 
Critics of the reorganization remarked, correctly, 
that few new men were added to the Department as 
a result but, in the six weeks which have elapsed since 
the changes went into effect, the improvement in 
State Department operations has been marked. 


The foremost single achievement of the reorgan- 
ization was the creation of a Policy Committee, com- 
posed of Secretary Cordell Hull, Under Secretary Ed- 
ward R. Stettinius, Jr., the four Assistant Secretaries, 
Legal Adviser Green H. Hackworth, and Special 
Assistant to the Secretary Leo Pasvolsky. On Febru- 
ary 22 Michael J. McDermott, special assistant to the 
Secretary in matters concerning the Department’s 
relations with the press, was added to the Commit- 
tee, which meets regularly three times a week to dis- 
cuss current questions. Thus top officials of the De- 
partment participate in all decisions on high policy 
(although the final word in political matters often 
rests with President Roosevelt or the Combined 
Chiefs of Staff Committee). Before January 15 the 
casually run Department reached high policy deci- 


FOR VICTORY ° 


sions only through conference among those officials 
immediately interested. 

Exploration of the Bolivian recognition problem, 
for instance, was monopolized by the Secretary and 
officers concerned with Latin American affairs, al. 
though its implications touched the whole range of 
American foreign policy. On the petroleum question, 
however—which has become acute since the reorgan- 
ization—the higher officials have been contributing 
to the ultimate decision through their exchanges at 
Policy Committee meetings. Officers immediate} 
concerned with whatever problem is before the Com. 


mittee share in its discussions. When the Committee | 


discusses Arabian oil, Charles D. Rayner, adviser on 
petroleum policy is present, with Wallace S. Murray, 
Director of the Office of Eastern and African Affairs, 
and John D. Hickerson, Chief of the Division of 
British Commonwealth Affairs. When it discusses 
Russia, Charles E. Bohlen, Chief of the Division of 
Eastern European Affairs, participates. 

The new set-up shows the Department's awareness 
of special problems which a modern foreign office 
must face. An obvious child of the war is the Com- 
mittee on Postwar Programs, whose Executive Direc- 
tor is Mr. Pasvolsky. In the Office of Economic Af- 
fairs, headed by Harry C. Hawkins, is a State De. 
partment newcomer, the Division of Labor Rela- 
tions, whose task is to collect data on labor matters 
abroad. This Division’s Acting Chief is Otis E. 
Mulliken, Harvard Ph.D., who was brought into the 
State Department from the Department of Agricul. 


ture, where he was an economist. He is to serve as 


liaison officer for the Department of State at the 
April conference of the International Labor Office. 
The reorganization provided an opportunity for pay- 
ing increased attention to the Department's public 


relations, and on February 22 the January 15 infor- | 
mational set-up was revised in order to improve | 


liaison between the State Department and the in- 
formation offices of other governmental agencies. 

MORE CHANGES TO COME. It will be the 
task of the newly created Division of Administrative 


Management, headed by M. L. Kenestrick, to note | 


weaknesses in the Administrative system and propose 
further changes. Already Secretary Hull has hinted 
that two or three new assistant secretaries are to be 
added; one of these might deal with postwar matters 
and another with public relations. Such additions 


will probably involve further reorganization of the , 


Department. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 















tha 


att 





