






























L a MAY 3 1938 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN oe 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff PERIODICAL ROOM class matter December 
fee Subscription, Two Dollars a Year GENBRAL LIBRARY pag 7 Say toe 
The - UNIV. OF MICH. N. Y., under wee 
the FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
l by 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
rein fF 
ung, Vou. XVII, No. 27 Aprit 29, 1938 
Vin- General Library 
the FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS on SPAIN 
eak. The War in Spain, May 1, 1938 University of Michigan 
and The Struggle Over Spain, April 1, 1938 aes 
nese U.S. Neutrality in the Spanish Conflict, Nov. 15, 1937 Ann Arbor, Michigan 
ping Spain: Civil War, Jan. 15, 1937 
Spain: Issues Behind the Conflict, Jan. 1, 1937 
pted SPECIAL OFFER—5 for $1.00 
: led —E 
ple. | —— oe 
f FRANCO SPLITS LOYALIST SPAIN 
ying 





1 by aa/ 1TH his forces engaged in a series of hammer 
will blows against the rapidly contracting lines of 
lice} the Loyalists, Generalissimo Franco declared on 
a April 19 that the Nationalists had won the war and 
nited that, after “justice” had been meted out to his op- 
| ponents, Spain would be rebuilt under an author- 
MOK} itarian régime. The prospects for peace on these 
‘MY*} terms were brought appreciably nearer by a Nation- 
apani alist drive which reached the Mediterranean on 
—— April 15, severing the industrial region of Catalonia 
ON | from the rest of Loyalist Spain. While his opponents 
strove desperately to re-form their lines, Franco em- 
ployed his overwhelming preponderance in aircraft, 
artillery and mechanized equipment to win new ter- 
titory. By April 20 Nationalist forces advancing east- 
ward into Catalonia, along the French border, had 
on the} Gained control of nine of the twelve main passes 
ory of} Over the Pyrenees to France. When the Loyalists, 
record} utilizing natural defenses, halted this offensive in the 
= Pyrenees and along the Ebro river, the Insurgents 
nds ts} shifted their pressure to a point northeast of Teruel, 
a we} preparatory to a southward drive against the key 
1¢ port of Valencia. Should this city fall, Madrid might 
be reduced by siege without much difficulty. 

York} Thus the Spanish deadlock, which had existed for 
many months, has finally been broken. The new 
putes} status climaxes gains resulting from a sweeping of- 
> Fir) fensive initiated on March 9, when the Insurgents 
struck along a 60-mile front in Aragon, south of 
Wilbur Saragossa, and advanced with startling rapidity. In 
» 1987) little more than a week they had won command of 
andl the main inland highway from Barcelona to Valencia 
terns “2d had captured Caspé, headquarters for govern- 
Ment troops in Aragon. Pressure was then directed 
——} farther north, in a movement toward Lérida, regard- 
éd as the key to Catalonia. Despite a stubborn de- 
fense, this city fell on April 3. 

As an accompaniment to these thrusts against Loy- 


)xford 








alist troops in the field, the Nationalists launched 
a series of pitiless bombing attacks on civilians in 
the rear, where they struck with unusual strength 
against Barcelona and other coastal cities. Between 
March 16 and 18, Barcelona was the victim of 18 
raids. Flying at an altitude of 12,000 to 20,000 feet 
—too high for accurate marksmanship—the bombers 
rained destruction on all parts of the city, both busi- 
ness and residential. It was estimated that one thou- 
sand persons were killed and twice that number in- 
jured. Some observers believed that these attacks had 
been aimed directly against the civilian population, 
in an effort to break down morale by terrorism. 
Franco supporters asserted, however, that the raids 
were designed primarily to damage some 180 mili- 
tary objectives within Barcelona, including arsenals, 
depots of gasoline and other supplies, arms factories, 
railway stations and docks. Britain and France pro- 
tested to the Insurgent authorities, declaring that 
such bombings were contrary both to the principles 
of international law and to those of common human- 


ity. London also urged the Vatican to exert its influ-~ 


ence, and on March 21 the Pope added his voice to 
the appeal. On the same day Secretary Hull, in a 
public statement, expressed the “sense of horror” of 
the American people over the bombings. 
Meanwhile, the Nationalists again shifted their 
attacks to the southern front. On April 2 the troops 
commanded by General Garcia Valino, including 
three Italian divisions, captured the strategic center 
of Gandesa, 25 miles from the Mediterranean. 
Checked by obstinate Loyalist resistance in an at- 
tempt to reach the sea at Tortosa, these forces turned 
southwest toward Vifiaroz and finally attained their 
goal at that Mediterranean port on April 15. Mov- 
ing northward along the coast, the Insurgents then 


reached the outskirts of Tortosa on April 18, but - 


there the government forces made a stand on the 









































— same ea 
ae eS = 
SE a Ge <a 











eastern bank of the Ebro. In the northern mountains 
the Nationalists were faced with only slight opposi- 
tion, and on April 7 took control of Catalonia’s larg- 
est hydroelectric station at Tremp, thus cutting off 
approximately 60 per cent of the current used in the 
region. Subsequently they moved forward toward 
Puig Cerda on the French border. 


Far from paralyzed by these telling blows, the 
Barcelona government made feverish efforts to 
strengthen the forces of resistance. Its troops, cut to 
pieces time and again by Franco’s machine-like ad- 
vance, were quickly reorganized and gave evidence 
of a morale which seemed but little impaired. Some 
100,000 new volunteers were called to the colors. 
The high command was reorganized. Counterblows 
designed to divert Insurgent pressure on Catalonia 
were launched on the Guadalajara front near Madrid 
and in Caceres province. A Franco decree of April 6, 
abrogating Catalonia’s cherished autonomy, spurred 
the inhabitants of the region to new and desperate 
activity. 

The Loyalists charged that Franco’s striking pow- 
er was due primarily to increased German and Italian 
aid, in troops, airplanes, artillery and other mechan- 
ized equipment. Ic was argued that the government's 
victory at Teruel last December had convinced the 
fascist states that they could assure Franco’s ultimate 
triumph only by endowing him with overwhelming 
superiority in material. In an attempt to counter this 
handicap, Premier Negrin had flown to Paris on 
March 15 to seek French support. But he was re- 
buffed in his plea for lowering of the barriers raised 
against shipment of planes and munitions to the Loy- 
alists under the “non-intervention” policy. Early in 
a however, the government forces did receive 
substantial foreign assistance, presumably from the 
Soviet Union. 


In an effort to meet the rapidly deteriorating situ- 
ation, Premier Negrin assumed semi-dictatorial war 

wers in a new and stronger Loyalist cabinet on 
April 4. More direct proletarian support was sought 
by including both trade-union federations—the So- 
cialist-Communist UGT and the Anarcho-Syndicalist 
CNT—in the government. The new ministry also 
gave evidence of a revival of Communist influence, 
apparently coincident with the receipt of Soviet sup- 
plies. While the number of posts held by the Com- 
munists was reduced from two to one, Jesis Her- 
ndndez was given direction of the newly revived sys- 
tem of army commissars, a position of great influ- 
ence. Alvarez del Vayo, long regarded as a Com- 
munist partisan, became Foreign Minister. Moreover, 
the party's most determined opponent, Indalecio 
_ Prieto, was removed as War Minister. Prieto’s con- 
servative policies had apparently been motivated by 
hopes of British and French assistance. The utter 


Page Two 








ee 
a 


failure of these expectations had undermined his po. 
sition and forced the Barcelona government to tum 
to the Soviet Union as its only hope. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


CAROL STRIKES AT IRON GUARD 

Moving vigorously, King Carol of Rumania has 
finally struck hard at his most dangerous opponent 
—the fascist leader, Corneliu Zelea Codreanu, and 
his Iron Guard. On April 13, apparently in order 
to explore the political situation, the King began a 
series of surprise inspections of defenses and local 
governments throughout the country. After sending 
Crown Prince Michael abroad to insure his safety, 
the government suddenly announced on April 17 
that it had arrested a large number of Iron Guard 
leaders, including Codreanu. Two days later the av- 
thorities using a libel charge as a pretext, sentenced 
him to six months’ imprisonment. The round-up of 
other fascists took on such proportions that the gov. 
ernment announced its intention to establish concen- 
tration camps for political prisoners. 

Officials claimed that a search of fascist head. 
quarters had uncovered a plot to march on Bucharest 
and seize control of the government. Large subsidies, 
it was alleged, had been granted the Iron Guard for 
this purpose by an unnamed foreign power. The 
government asserted it had found evidence to prove 
that the fascist conspiracy eached into high official 





circles, including the Ministry of Defense and the 
General Staff. 

The struggle between King Carol and Codreanu 
had long been brewing. As far back as 1933, the tet 


rorist Iron Guard had become so powerful that the 


government feared to molest it even after Guards 
had “executed” Premier Ion Duca for banning the 
organization. Large fascist gains in the elections held 
in December 1937 led the King to put Octavian 
Goga, another Right-wing extremist, into office for 
forty days in order to win reactionary support away 
from Codreanu. On February 20, Carol, who has 
been moving toward outright personal rule evet 
since the defeat of his parliamentary favorites in the 
December election, proclaimed a new constitution 
formally confirming him in his exercise of autocrati¢ 
powers. Obeying the official ban on political parties, 
Codreanu “dissolved” the Iron Guard on February 
21. The Nazi coup in Austria, however, spurred the 
fascist organization—which had continued to fune 
tion—to new efforts. In view of Codreanu’s hold 
over his fanatical following, it seems likely that the 
Iron Guard will continue to be a threat to Carol’ 
position. 

Although the King’s personal dictatorship is sane 
tioned by a “constitution,” it has little support among 
the masses, who are politically apathetic. A few lead 


(Continued on Page 4) 





——— 


is po- 
turn 


ON 


a has 
onent 
, and 
order 
yan a 
local 
nding 
afety, 
‘il 17 
suard 
1€ au 
enced 
up of 
> gO 
ncen- 


head- 
harest 
sidies, 
rd for 
. The 
prove 
official 
id the 


lreany pur 


he tet- 


at the 


yuards 
rg the 
s held 
tavian 
ce for 
: away 
10 has 
> evel 
in the 
itution 
ocratic 
arties, 
bruaty 
ed the 
» fune 
s hold 
nat the 
Carols 


Ss sane 
among 
w lead 








W. ashington News E etter 














Ya, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


ApriL 25—Some of the inner springs of American 
diplomacy were exposed last week in a series of sur- 
face and subsurface developments affecting the con- 
troversial issues of neutrality, the Spanish embargo 
and the Anglo-Italian pact. To most Washington ob- 
servers, the events of the week signify a qualified but 
impressive triumph for the professional diplomats. 


Three Moves in Sequence. The first move in the 
sequence of events was made by Representative 
Byron Scott, a member of the House bloc which is 
seeking to amend or repeal the Neutrality Act and 
to lift the embargo on arms shipments to Spain. On 
April 15 Mr. Scott called on President Roosevelt to 
discuss the propriety of a resolution asking the Pres- 
ident what nations, if any, have violated treaties to 
which the United States is a party. If furnished with 
such a list (which they hoped would include Japan, 
Italy and Germany), the House group would launch 
anew drive to amend existing legislation in accord 
with the principles of concerted action against ag- 
gression. Leaving the White House with the firm 
conviction that Mr. Roosevelt sympathized with his 
pose, Mr. Scott introduced his resolution the 
following Monday, April 18. Round one went to 
Mr. Scott when Chairman McReynolds of the House 
Foreign Affairs Committee transmitted the resolution 
to the State Department. 


The second move came on Tuesday, at the White 
House press conference, when President Roosevelt 
Ssued a meticulously correct diplomatic statement 
of the Administration’s attitude on the recently 
signed Anglo-Italian accord. The statement was 
drafted across the street at the State Department, al- 
legedly by Sumner Welles, Under-Secretary of State. 
In impeccable language, it recalled the position of 
this government with respect to ‘‘maintenance of in- 
ternational law and order” and the “promotion of 
peace through the finding of means for economic ap- 
peasement.’’ Without attempting to pass on the 
"political features” of accords such as that between 
Britain and Italy, it viewed the conclusion of this 
particular accord with “sympathetic interest” because 
itis proof of the value of peaceful negotiations. To 
the assembled correspondents, as to most diplomatic 
Observers in Washington, these carefully chosen 
words were taken as a friendly pat to Mr. Chamber- 
lain and a gentle rebuke to Mr. Scott. Round two, 
therefore, went to the professional diplomats who 


believe that the London-Rome accord is a substantial 
step toward appeasement and that American policy 
in Europe should not run at cross purposes with Brit- 
ish policy. 

The third move came at the President's Friday 
press conference, when Mr. Roosevelt discussed the 
application of the American neutrality law to the 
Spanish civil war. His remarks followed a pes of 
intensive activity on the part of friends of Loyalist 
Spain and other liberal American groups who have 
been seeking to lift the Spanish embargo. Some nine- 
teen or twenty Senators, and a number of influential 
Congressmen had privately expressed their willing- 
ness to support repeal of the Embargo Act of Jan- 
uary 8, 1937—applied directly to Spain—and to 
modify those provisions of the general neutrality law 
relating to “civil strife.” Senator Borah, one of those 
in favor of ending the Spanish embargo, had been 
to the White House to canvass the matter with the 
President. But the President’s reply, as given later at 
the press conference, was noncommittal. He voiced 
some dissatisfaction with the Neutrality Act, as he 
has done before. He implied that its application to 
Spain had not been entirely satisfactory. But he de- 
clined to give much comfort to those leading the 
movement for a change in policy at this time. The 
neutrality law, he said, had two objectives—to keep 
the United States out of war, and to avoid giving aid 
to one side against the other in armed conflicts any- 
where. While the law had been difficult to operate, 
he felt that neutrality had been applied to Spain as 
well as was possible under the Act, and to change 
the Act now would violate the second objective. By 
indirection, he implied that it would not be possible 
to apply the Act against Germany and Italy. 


Thus, for the second time in the course of the 
week, Mr. Roosevelt reflected complete agreement 
with the State Department view. While the career 
diplomats dislike the binding restrictions of the 
Neutrality Act, they don’t propose to be maneuvered 
into a position of reversing their stand on Spain, or 
branding Germany and Italy as aggressors, or-—most 
important of all—parting company with Great Brit- 
ain on an issue of European policy. As one Washing- 
ton commentator puts it, “America’s policy toward 
Europe again clears through London.” 

Despite these indications of the current trend, the 
future course of American diplomacy remains uncer- 
tain. The answer to Mr. Scott’s resolution—already 
sent Chairman McReynolds but not yet made public 
—may clarify other doubtful points, but it is unlikely 














—_—_—_—_—_—_—— 
—_—_—_— 








to end the uncertainty over fundamental objectives. 
One explanation of the many conflicting rumors 
which continue to circulate in Washington is the 
undoubted division of opinion within even the inner 
circles of the Administration. The controversy over 
Secretary Ickes’ stand against the release of helium 
gas for the use of the German Zeppelin is one minor 
example of a division which is rooted in fundamental 
principles and conflicting philosophies. There are 
other examples of the same line of cleavage. What 
seems to be emerging, however, is the increasing in- 
fluence of the professional diplomats of the State 


Department. WILLIAM T. STONE 


CAROL STRIKES AT IRON GUARD 
(Continued from Page 2) 

ers of the former political parties, drawn almost en- 
tirely from former Premier Tatarescu’s group of 
Liberals, appear to support the régime. Dr. Maniu’s 
democratic National Peasant Party, which had helped 
Carol into power in 1930 and broken with him three 
years later, has denounced the King as vigorously 
as Codreanu. 

These developments have thus far brought no es- 
sential change in Rumania’s foreign policy. Although 
the new Foreign Minister, M. Petrescu-Comnen, is 


Page Four 








—> 


considered strongly pro-German, he declared empha. 
tically, on April 7, that Rumania would remain 
faithful to its obligations to the Little Entente and 
the Balkan Entente, as well as to France and Poland, 
Rumania, however, lies within the scope of probable 
German designs for the reorganization of South. 
eastern Europe. In 1937, Germany and Austria took 
27 per cent of Rumania’s exports and supplied 38 
per cent of its imports; and trade relations between 
the two countries are likely to become even more 
important in the future. In case of war, Ge 
would find Rumania’s oil, wheat, and other raw ma- 
terials and foodstuffs indispensable. As Germany ad. 
vances toward the Southeast, moreover, two of its 
potential allies, Hungary and Bulgaria, are likely to 
claim restoration of territory which they lost to Ru 
mania as a result of the World War. 

King Carol is thus faced with a choice. On the one 
hand, he may seek safety by close adherence to 
France and the Little Entente. On the other, he may 
come to terms with Hitler, with Hungary and per 
haps with Bulgaria. Or he may adopt a middle posi- 
tion, as did his predecessor before the World War. 
The ultimate decision is likely to hinge on the out 
come of the struggle between Carol and Codreany 
for dictatorial power. PAUL B. TAYLOR 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


The White Sahibs in India, by Reginald Reynolds. New 
York, Reynal and Hitchcock, 1937. $3.50 


India Reveals Herself, by Basil Matthews. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1937. $2.50 


Two interpretations of contemporary India which are 
entirely different in approach. Mr. Reynolds provides a 
scathing denunciation of British rule, carefully footnoting 
his vivid pictures of tyranny and cruelty. Mr. Matthews, 
writing in a more personal vein, presents an interesting 
account of his travels and interviews throughout the 
country. 


Diplomatic Correspondence of the United States, Inter- . 


American Affairs, Vol. 1X, Mexico. Washington, Car- 
negie Endowment for International Peace, 1937. $5.00 
This new volume in a valuable series publishes the most 
important documents in the Department of State, dealing 
with Mexican-American relations between 1848 and 1860. 


The International Economic Position of Argentina, by 
Vernon Lovell Phelps. Philadelphia, University of Penn- 
sylvania Press, 1938. $3.00 


A careful and well-written analysis of Argentina’s 
commercial and financial relations from 1914 to 1935, 
with particular reference to the United States. The author 
presents a wealth of carefully selected statistical material, 
much of which had not previously been available in an 
assimilable form. The chapters on foreign trade trends, 
factors in import trade, and on foreign commercial policy 
will probably prove of most interest to the general reader. 


Boundaries, Possessions, and Conflicts in South America, 
by Gordon Ireland. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard Uni- 
versity Press, 1938. $4.50 
A factual history of twenty-nine border disputes entered 

into by the Latin American republics, together with an 

analysis of the bipartite and multipartite arbitration 
treaties between these states. The book’s major value is 
as a work of reference. 


Education in Pacific Countries, by Felix M. Keesing. 
Honolulu, University of Hawaii Bookstore, 1937. $1.50 
This report of a five weeks’ seminar conference, held at 

Honolulu in the summer of 1936, considers the problems 

of education and cultural adjustment among peoples it 

the Pacific area. The conference included 66 educators 
and social scientists from 27 national and racial groups. 

It was carefully prepared, and the summary of its dit 

cussions constitutes a valuable contribution to an impor 

tant subject. 


America Goes to War, by Charles Callan Tansill. Boston, 

Little, Brown and Company, 1938. $5.00 

Despite a tendency to handle British policy and Colonel 
House unfairly, this volume is the most thorough and im 
portant work so far on the reasons why the United States 
entered the world war. The author concludes that “there 
is not the slightest evidence that during the Hundred Days 
that preceded America’s entry into the World War the 
President gave any heed to demands from ‘big business 
that America intervene in order to save investments ..-: 
Colonel House and Secretary Lansing had far more inflt 
ence than the House of Morgan.” 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 27, Aprit 29, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasim Bug, President; Vana Micnutes Daan, Editor. Entered as second-class matt! 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 





