















ident 
l. ap 
iting 
e th 


plot 
rous 





JRAR 
Mice, 


a 


FEB 41 1944 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


or, Mion 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











; dis} 
vithin 
auxi! 
yy the 


of a 


at has 
all in- 


ntion- 
nition 
losure 





ce its 
| from 
sulted 
entini 
| muth 
break: 
rtina’s 


in the; 


S 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 17 


FEBRUARY 11, 1944 





RUSSIA CREATES A FRAMEWORK FOR EAST EUROPEAN FEDERATION 


ECENT indications that the United States and 

Britain may be on the point of clarifying their 
policy toward Europe—with specific reference to 
France and Italy—are welcomed by all who had felt 
growing uneasiness over the dangerous lag in the 
political strategy of the Western powers. Such clari- 
fication has been made imperative by the bold bid 
for influence in post-war Europe announced by the 
U.S.S.R., whose military advances, unlike those of 


_ the British and Americans, are closely meshed with 


political plans. This is the real significance of the 
statement of Premier Molotov to the Supreme Coun- 
cil of the U.S.S.R. in Moscow on February 1 that the 
sixteen Union republics now composing the Union 
will henceforth enjoy the right to pursue their own 
foreign policy, and raise their own armed forces 
which are to form component parts of the Red Army. 

CHARACTER OF U.S.S.R. Molotov’s announce- 
ment opens up far-reaching vistas for the war and 
post-war activities of the U.S.S.R. among its neigh- 
bors in Europe and Asia. No one familiar with the 
Soviet Union, as established by the basic treaty of 
1922 between the four original republics (the Rus- 
sian S.S.R., the Ukrainian S$.S.R., the White Russian 
S.S.R., and the Transcaucasian S.S.R.), can pretend 
that the sixteen republics will enjoy independence in 
international affairs in the sense in which this term 
has been hitherto understood. The largest of the con- 
stituent republics remains, as in 1922, the Russian 
S.S.R., which includes more than nine-tenths of the 
area and more than two-thirds of the population of 
the pre-1939 territory of the Soviet Union, and em- 
braces most of European Russia and all of Asiatic 
Russia, with the exception of Turkmenistan and 
Uzbekistan. It is the political, military and economic 
weight of this key republic that has made the influ- 
ence of the U.S.S.R. increasingly felt in world coun- 
cils, and this weight would hardly be increased by 
the grant to the other fifteen republics of the right to 





have their own foreign policy and armed forces. The 
numerical prestige of added votes at future United 
Nations conferences may therefore be discounted as 
a primary reason for the Kremlin’s decision. Its main 
objects, so far as can be discerned are, first, to en- 
hance the power of attraction of the U.S.S.R. for 
other nations which, in the continued absence of an 
effective international organization, may find them- 
selves adrift without bearings following the defeat 
of Germany; and, second, to give the outward sem- 
blance of independence to those nations that may de- 
cide to steer their future course under the aegis of 
the Soviet Union, thus helping them to “save face” 
and possibly affording technical satisfaction to the 
signatories of the Atlantic Charter. 

CULTURAL AUTONOMY ENCOURAGED. 
This latest move in Soviet foreign policy is a direct 
outgrowth of the program that guided the formation 
of the U.S.S.R. in 1922. At that time the Soviet 
leaders purposely left the word “Russia” out of the 
name of the new Union, on the assumption that 
other soviet socialist republics, whenever and wher- 
ever formed, might eventually join the U.S.S.R. Ac- 
tually, there is no doubt that the Soviet government 
has given great latitude to the more than 150 differ- 
ent races and nationalities that compose the U.S.S.R. 
to practice their own language, customs, and tradi- 
tions—but not, until recently, their religious beliefs— 
provided they conformed with the over-all political 
and economic pattern of the dictatorship centered 
in Moscow and controlled by the Communist party. 
The various national groups have been represented 
as such in the upper chamber of the Supreme Council 
—the Council of Nationalities—which was preserved 
in the 1936 Constitution of the U.S.S.R. at the in- 
sistence of Stalin, himself a native of Georgia, 
One of the minority national groups in the Union. 

It would, therefore, be entirely in accordance with 
the precedent set in 1922 for the U.S.S.R. to invite, 






f 


ne BI mane ‘ a a 
: Swe a SS a ~- 7. 





Ese Re ee 


wom 


a So es ae mm REFIT A Pare oarTs 
: —< rn 


at 


sae 





Oe Ee eh tee eet Eg eo ee od 


i 
4 
| 
,. 
| 
j 
: 
& 
i 


‘ 
! 








or induce, the entrance of other soviet socialist re- 
publics in the future—for example Poland under a 
régime sympathetic to that of Moscow, such as the 
Union of Polish Patriots, or Yugoslavia under a 
régime headed by Marshal Tito. Meanwhile, the 
Kremlin could answer criticisms from Britain and 
the United States—and the Russians are by no means 
insensitive to these criticisms—concerning Russia’s 
pre-1941 absorption of Eastern Poland or the Baltic 
states by pointing out that these territories, since then 
incorporated into the U.S.S.R., will retain indepen- 
dence in matters of defense and foreign policy. The 
way in which this procedure will operate has been 
illustrated without delay by the appointment of Alex- 
ander Korneichuk, former Vice-Commissar of For- 
eign Affairs of the U.S.S.R., as Foreign Commissar 
of the Ukrainian S.S.R. It so happens that Korneichuk 
is the husband of Wanda Wassilewska, Polish writer 
who now heads the Union of Polish Patriots. To- 
gether they can—and may be expected—to make an 
appeal over the head of the Polish government in 
London to the Ukrainians of Eastern Poland to join 
the Ukrainian S.S.R.; a similar appeal can be made 
by the White Russian S.S.R. to the White Russians 
in Eastern Poland, and so on down the long border of 
the U.S.S.R. from the Baltic to the Black Sea. 
U.S.S.R. FILLS VACUUM. The use that is being 
made by Stalin of the flexible formula of national 
cultural autonomy within the framework of a strong- 
ly centralized federation has already caused alarm in 
Washington and London, not to speak of some of 
the spokesthen for the small nations that lie in the 
path of the Russian advance against Germany. Two 
things must be borne in mind, however. First, the 
old adage that nature abhors a vacuum applies to in- 
ternational as to other human affairs. The vacuum 
which, we must hope, is soon to be left in Euro 
by the collapse of Hitler’s “new order” should have 
been prepared for long ago—had Britain and 
the United States moved with political boldness 
and imagination—by the creation of a United 


DOMINIONS DIFFER ON FUTURE OF BRITISH COMMONWEALTH 


The appeal made by Lord Halifax in Toronto on 
January 24 for a concerted post-war policy among the 
nations of the British Commonwealth suggests that 
this war, like the last, will precipitate important 
changes in the structure of the Commonwealth. It is 
evident, however, from the Canadian reaction to the 
Halifax proposal, on the one hand, and the develop- 
ment of Australian-New Zealand policy, on the 
other, that centralization is not equally attractive to 
all the Dominions and that the evolution of a new 
pattern will be a slow process. 

THE HALIFAX PROPOSAL. Like Field Mar- 
shal Smuts in his speech of November 26, Lord Hali- 
fax envisaged a post-war world in which the United 


PageTwo 








ey 
—$—$— 


Nations organization capable both of adjusti 
impending conflicts and of- using force to assure 
the security of all nations, large and small. The 
truth is that the Western powers have not moved y 
far toward international organization during the war, 
except on paper, and have confined their efforts a 
collaborative machinery largely to cooperation amon 
themselves. In the absence of an over-all United No. 
tions organization, it was to be expected that Russia, 
now on the crest of the wave, would use such meth. 
ods as it considers best to achieve its own secutity 
against the possible resurgence of Germany after the 
war. While we have been debating the pros and cons 
of an international police force and a United Nations 
political council, the Russians have evolved their own 
version of both for Eastern Europe. 

Second, neither Britain nor the United States has 
shown much concern in the past for the welfare of 
the peoples living in the uneasy borderlands between 
Germany and Russia. Nor have the Western powers 
been actually in a military position to render them 


effective aid against either of their powerful neigh- | 


bors. The small countries of this long-contested area 
must find some basis for stability and recovery after 
the war if they are not to fall prey to further conflict 
and impoverishment. Many of their leaders have 
looked to the Western democracies for inspiration 
and aid—but, let us admit it frankly, have for the 
most part looked in vain. To say that they were really 
independent between 1919 and 1939, moreover, 
would be to disregard the pressures to which, in fact, 
they were almost constantly subjected by either Ger- 
many or Russia, or both. If they should now place 
their bets on cooperation with Russia, as Czechoslo- 
vakia already has done through the Russo-Czech 
treaty of mutual assistance, this should not come as 
a surprise to Britain and the United States—but ra- 
ther as a reminder that we cannot expect to exercise 
power in any area of the world unless we are ready 





has f 
dilem 
war a 
it has 
riskin 
the C 

O7 
Prim 
thesis 
Janué 
Halif 
stren, 
conce 
powe 
grap! 
Unio 
ish C 
the ¢ 
senti 
syste 


oper 


ister 
his ¢ 
Libe 
pres 
Colc 
) pudi 
kenz 
no-c 
intel 
the 
at p 
ship 
, this 
fere 
afte 
aut 





and willing to assume the responsibilities that go 
with power. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


States, the U.S.S.R., China and Britain would assume 
leadership in maintaining peace. Instead of looking, 


_ 
-—_-_ = Aa S&S ae 





as Smuts did, to the support of Western Europe to 


give the United Kingdom equality with the other | 


three, Halifax declared that ‘‘the British Common- 
wealth and Empire must be the fourth power.” But 
for the Commonwealth to be effective, he said, all its 
members would have to pursue a common course if 
“foreign policy, defense, economic affairs, colonial 


questions and communications.” This could be ‘\ 


achieved, he assured his audience, without reversing 
the 75-year trend by which the Dominions had at 
tained equality of status with Britain. Moreover, it 
would remove the dilemma in which every Dominion 








REFS) 








RAS ace il 


lict 
ave 
ion 
the 
ally 
ver, 
act, 
ef: 
ace 
slo- 


ime 
ing, 
> to 





ther | 


\on- 
But 
| its 
e in 
nial 


sing 
at 
r, it 
1101 











a 
—_ 


has found itself at the outbreak of a major war: the 
dilemma that it must either join with Britain in a 
war arising out of a foreign policy concerning which 
it has had little or no voice, or must stay out, thereby 
risking the defeat of Britain and the disruption of 
the Commonwealth. 


OTTAWA’S REACTION. Not unexpectedly, 
Prime Minister Mackenzie King rejected the Halifax 
thesis in addressing the House of Commons on 
January 31. He did not agree with the Smuts and 
Halifax concept of a peace based on a balance of 
strength between three or four great powers. This 
conception implies the inevitable rivalry of the great 

wers, he said, and to this Canada, “situated geo- 
graphically between the United States and the Soviet 
Union, and at the same time a member of the Brit- 
ish Commonwealth,” could not give its support. On 
the contrary, Canada seeks to achieve the power es- 
sential for peace by creating an effective international 
system in which all peace-loving countries would co- 
operate. 

In taking this position the Canadian Prime Min- 
ister undoubtedly reflected not only the sentiment of 
his own party but majority opinion in Canada. The 
Liberal and French Canadian press had already ex- 
pressed opposition to the Halifax idea, while M. J. 
Coldwell, leader of the C.C.F. party, had flatly re- 
pudiated it. With an election due by June 1945, Mac- 
kenzie King—even if he had wished to reverse the 
no-commitment policy which he pursued during the 
inter-war years—could not afford to alienate either 
the French vote or that part of the electorate which 
at present wavers between Liberal and C.C.F. leader- 
ship. He did indicate, however, that he did not wish 
this question to become an election issue lest it inter- 
fere with the war effort. In view of Canada’s attitude 
after World War I, when it took the lead in gaining 
autonomy for the Dominions, only a serious break 





a 





Page Three 





What is the Western economic stake in Asia? How 
much would it cost the metropolitan countries to 
give up their empires in the East? How will the 
rest of the world adjust itself to the rise of new 
nations in a free and industrialized Asia? READ— 
INDEPENDENCE FOR COLONIAL ASIA— 
THE COST TO THE WESTERN WORLD 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


. February 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 














in the unity of the United Nations would bring 
about any rapid change in Canadian opinion on this 
question. Certainly Canada will adopt no course 
which would be seriously opposed in Washington. 


AUSTRALIA-NEW ZEALAND PACT. The two 
Dominions of the South Pacific—less secure than 
Canada, free from its biracial problem, and both in a 
post-election period—have already set their course 
toward a more centralized Commonwealth. Repeat- 
ing suggestions he made earlier, Prime Minister John 
Curtin of Australia proposed on December 14, 1943 
that a concerted Commonwealth policy be reached 
by instituting a series of conferences of prime min- 
isters and establishing a permanent secretariat. More 
recently, in commenting on the Australia-New Zea- 
land Agreement of January 21, 1944, both Herbert 
Evatt, Australian Minister for External Affairs, and 
Peter Fraser, New Zealand Prime Minister, expressed 
their desire to tighten Commonwealth bonds. 


The January 21 pact illustrates the post-war views 
of the two Dominions. The most significant terms are: 
1. establishment of what is in effect a defensive alli- 
ance between Canberra and Wellington; 2. support 
for a general international organization such as that 
outlined in the Moscow Declaration of November 1, 
1943; 3. support for a regional council for defense 
and welfare in the South Pacific Islands, to include, 
in addition to the two signatories, the United States, 
Britain, and France; 4. support for an international 
air transport authority which would own and operate 
the great trunk routes of the world, failing which the 
two countries would support a system of air lines 
owned and operated by the governments of the Brit- 
ish Commonwealth. 


Australia and New Zealand apparently believe that 
close collaboration with the United States in defense 
and welfare arrangemen:: for the South Seas and 
membership in an international organization with 
sufficient powers to operate international air trans- 
port need not be hindered by centralization of the 
Commonwealth. The Canadian government, on the 
other hand, is of the opinion that such a development 
in the Commonwealth would prove an obstacle to 
close relations with other countries—particularly the 
United States—and to the creation of an interna- 
tional organization which would guarantee freedom 
of action to the small countries. Whether this gap in 
Dominion thinking will be closed or narrowed de- 
pends largely on the shape of the post-war world 
and, in any case, will probably take considerable time. 

Howarpb P. WHIDDEN, JR. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 17, Fasruary 11, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Laer, Secretary; Vera Micue es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Se eee rn ges 


oe EL 





ae a 
eerie eee ~ wes 


ee 


Rte 


Washington News Letter 

















Fes. 7.—On November 13, 1943 Marshal Pietro 
Badoglio said that he would “retire” as Italian Pre- 
mier when Rome was liberated. The slow and ardu- 
ous advance of the Allied armies has brought them 
within sight of Rome, and Washington is now count- 
ing on Badoglio to make good his pledge as a first 
step toward reorganization of Italy's government. 
The Administration is dissatisfied with that govern- 
ment, and concurs in one of the resolutions passed 
by the six anti-fascist groups which met on January 
28 at Bari, demanding the abdication of King Victor 
Emmanuel. So far Britain has not officially disclosed 
whether it agrees with Washington. 

Administratively Italy is divided into three parts. 
Sicily and the three southernmost provinces of the 
mainland are nominally governed by King Victor 
Emmanuel through the Badoglio régime, under the 
supervision of the British-American Allied Military 
Government. The Allied combat zone is subject 
wholly to military control; while German-held Italy 
is ostensibly a republic with Benito Mussolini as 
president, but with local officials disregarding Musso- 
lini’s leadership and dealing directly with the Ger- 
man military commanders. 

CHANGE IMPENDS IN ITALY. The jurisdic- 
tion of the King and Badoglio is to be extended on 
February 10 to a northern boundary running from 
Salerno on the Tyrrhenian Sea to Barletta on the 
Adriatic. At that time AMG is to withdraw north of 
this boundary and transfer the supervision it has exer- 
cised over the Italian régime to the Armistice Com- 
mission. While the change is largely technical, since 
the Commission, like the AMG, is responsible pri- 
marily to the military, it paves the way for revision 
of Allied policy, which heretofore has upheld Ba- 
doglio and Victor Emmanuel—provided the United 
States and Britain can reach an understanding. 

The president of the Armistice Commission is 
Gen. Sir Henry Maitland Wilson, commander of the 
Mediterranean area, who has designated Gen. Sir 
Harold Alexander, commander of the Fifth and 
Eighth Armies, as acting president. The deputy pres- 
ident is also a Britisher, Lt. Gen. F. N. Mason Mac- 
Farlane, former governor of Gibraltar. The Commis- 
sion is divided into four sections, each of which is 
headed by a vice president: Gen. Alexander is vice 
president for the military section; Harold Caccia, 
of the British Foreign Office, for the political 
section; and Air Commodore Stansgate, RAF, for 
the administrative and economic section. The one 
American vice president is Capt. Ellery Stone, USNR, 


FOR VICTORY °* 


‘ Italy. However, in consequence of the visit to Italy 


for the communications section. The United States 
has two deputy vice presidents—Samuel Reber, of 
the State Department, in the political section; and 
Henry F. Grady, formerly of the Department of 
Commerce, in the administrative and economic see. 
tion. The Commission’s task will be to enforce com, | 
pliance with the armistice signed by Badoglio op | 
September 8, 1943. 

President Roosevelt told newspapermen at his 
press conference on February 1 that the Italian 
people would be permitted to choose the kind of gov. 
ernment they want, but that the time for the choice 
has not been set. Tight censorship has kept the Amer. 
ican public uninformed of the political wishes of 
the Italians in Allied controlled territory, and news 
of public opinion in German Italy is rare. Reports 
that have reached the United States from southem | 
Italy emphasize dissatisfaction with the King. On 
October 30 Count Sforza, former Italian Foreign} 
Minister, said in Naples that he favored creation of 
a regency for the Prince of Naples, aged six, grand 
son of Victor Emmanuel. The same position has 
been taken by Benedetto Croce, distinguished Italian 
historian and long-time anti-Fascist. 

Washington tentatively favors a regency for the 
Prince of Naples, who is in Switzerland with his 
mother, daughter of the late King Albert of the Bel- | 
gians. It fears that a change to a republic at this 
juncture would slow down Italy's return to political 
and social stability. The Combined Chiefs of Staff 
Committee, which makes the principal military de | 
cisions for the Western Allies, has opposed any ac 
tion that would endanger Victor Emmanuel’s throne, 
on the ground that the Allied armies cannot tisk 
having at their rear the disorder they believe might 
follow his departure. If changes are made when the 
Allied armies take Rome, the problem will be wheth- 
er to drop the King or merely to broaden the bast} 
of his cabinet by the inclusion of more anti-fascists. 

FOOD SUPPLY SHORT. Meanwhile, the Allied 
Military Government has found it difficult in the 
midst of combat to distribute the large quantities of \ 
food needed by the civilian inhabitants of the lib | 
erated areas. This shortage has caused resentment | 
against the United States and Britain in southem | 








by Adlai Stevenson, special agent of the Foreign Eco 
nomic Administration, arrangements have been made 
in Washington to increase the flow of food to Italy | 
from overseas. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





191 


— 


VoL. 


—_-_ 


RI 
T I 
f 
Cath 
hatre 
port: 
spre 
linke 
of t 
Fore 
copi 
ary | 
base 
whi 
cout 
gan: 
We 


new 
of t 


| the 


ticle 
heat 
moc 
sup 
pro 
tim 
whz 
acce 
mut 

P 
tior 
ver: 
for 
CSCé 
may 
an ; 
dist 
pos 
wit 
wh: 





