On 
‘ited 
tion 

the 
ised 
ved 
lary 
idor 
this 


N 


itional 
Editor. 


FOREIGN PO 


An interpretation of current inter é 5 

Subscription, One Dollar a Yeat 

FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 


LICY BULLETIN 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
: AN. y¥_cander the act 
N ] i 2 
df Mar 3, 1879 


. ‘ 


VoL. XV, No. 34 JUNE 19, 


1936 


ORIGINS OF THE LOCARNO CRISIS 
by Vera Micheles Dean 
An analysis of Franco-British diplomatic negotiations 
with Germany which is essential to an understanding 
of the Locarno crisis precipitated by the Reich’s remil- 
itarization of the Rhineland. 


June 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Library of Congress, 


Washinzton, D. C. 


WILL NANKING FIGHT 


JAPAN-OR CANTON? 


FTER two weeks of suspense, it is still un- 

certain whether the demand of the Kwang- 
tung-Kwangsi generals for permission to send an 
anti-Japanese force northward through Chiang 
Kai-shek’s territory will result in civil war. Large 
armies mobilized by the Southwest authorities 
and Nanking face each other along the line of the 
northern Kwangtung-Kwangsi boundary, and pre- 
liminary clashes in southern Hunan have been re- 
ported. On the other hand, the growing strength 
of the nationalist movement is steadily forcing 
China’s military leaders and political cliques to 
establish unity on the basis of a common front 
against Japan. Since the first student demonstra- 
tions in Peiping last December, this movement has 
become so powerful that the Canton government 
has now accorded it official support. Of China’s im- 
portant military leaders, only Chiang Kai-shek at 
Nanking still remains opposed to the adoption of 
an uncompromising anti-Japanese program. Mean- 
while, the stand taken by the Cantonese author- 
ities has supplied an additional powerful stimulus 
to Chinese nationalism and strengthened resis- 
tance to Japanese aggression. As a direct conse- 
quence of this development, the new forward 
moves planned by the Japanese military in north 
China have been brought to a standstill. This re- 
sult is a clear rebuke to the Nanking government, 
which has continuously acted on the assumption 
that the anti-Japanese movement must be sup- 
pressed in order to avoid giving offence to Japan. 


Although the motives of the Canton authorities 
have been impugned by Chiang Kai-shek and his 
followers at Nanking, the facts of the situation 
testify to the differences between the respective 
policies of the two régimes. Under an emergency 
edict promulgated by the Nanking government, 
all anti-Japanese activities have been forcibly 
suppressed in the central and north China prov- 
inces. The most recent example of this practice 
occurred on June 13. Defying the ban, some 5,000 


Chinese students demonstrated in the streets of 
Peiping, with placards and leaflets denouncing the 
increase of Japanese troops in north China and 
calling for united action of all Chinese forces 
against Japan. The demonstration was broken up 
by the Chinese police; many students were in- 
jured, and many arrested. The gates of Peiping 
were closed to bar entrance of students from uni- 
versities outside the city, while the schools within 
the city were surrounded by police and gendarmes. 
This is not an isolated incident. In recent months, 
student demonstrations in Shanghai, Tientsin and 
other cities have been similarly dealt with by Nan- 
king’s police forces. 

On the same day—June 13—a demonstration 
also took place at Canton, described as “one of the 
most gigantic parades and mass meetings in the 
history” of the city. This meeting—called to pro- 
test against Japanese aggression—gathered under 
the official auspices of the Canton government. 
At the head of the parade marched officials of the 
city and provincial governments, followed by in- 
fantry regiments, cadets, boy and gir] scouts, first- 
aid nursing units from Sun Yat-sen University, 
ordinary citizens, students, farmers, workers, and 
coolies. The demonstration ended at the city 
athletic field, where several hundred thousand 
people assembled in a vast mass meeting. Three 
resolutions were passed at this assembly: (1) For 
a telegraphic demand to Nanking asking immediate 
action to resist Japanese aggression; (2) For a 
nation-wide order to military authorities to mobil- 
ize their forces to block the Japanese invader; 
(3) For requests to Chinese overseas, in America 
and elsewhere, to urge Nanking to fight Japan 
immediately. 

The mass demand that is rising throughout 
China for united action against Japan is rem- 
iniscent of the 1919 movement, which swept the 
Japanese-dominated Anfu clique from office. It is 
the best guarantee that no political group, either in 


a a 


Canton or Nanking, will be able to plunge the na- 
tion into fratricidal civil strife. At the present 
moment, however, the responsibility for this de- 
cision rests primarily on the shoulders of Gener- 
alissimo Chiang Kai-shek. For nearly five years, 
he has held command of the nation’s strongest 
military forces without once lifting his hand 
against the successive Japanese encroachments. 
Four years ago at Shanghai, he permitted the 
heroic Nineteenth Route Army—a Cantonese 
force—to struggle unaided against the Japanese 
military machine. Is Chiang Kai-shek now pre- 
paring to play the same role again? 
T. A. BISSON 
BOLIVIAN OVERTURN 


Both belligerents in the Chaco conflict—Para- 
guay, the victor, and Bolivia, the vanquished— 
have been the scene of post-war revolts which 
brought to power military dictatorships with rad- 
ical social programs. On May 17, three months 
after the successful coup of Colonel Rafael Franco 
and his followers in Paraguay, the Bolivian army 
ousted President Luis Tejada Sorzano and took 
control of national affairs. The Bolivian revolt 
placed in office a mixed military and civilian jun- 
ta, headed by Colonel David Toro, 37-year-old war 
hero and chief of the army general staff. As in 
Paraguay, the movement had left-wing support 
represented by three so-called Socialist parties: the 
Marxian Socialists, who command some labor sup- 
port; the National Socialists, made up chiefly of 
former army men, reportedly influenced by Nazi 
ideas; and the Republican Socialists, the more 
liberal of two old-time parties. 


The Chaco war loosed new forces in Bolivia, a 
mountainous, land-locked republic, where a small 
group of ruling whites exploit and dominate al- 
most three million Indians and mestizos. The mil- 
itary came out of the war with enhanced powers 
and pretensions, which were opposed by civilian 
groups, resentful of the army’s failure to win the 
war. Political rivalries had been stirred anew by 
the election campaign, with the choice of a Pres- 
ident scheduled for May 31. Economic unrest was 
widespread, despite the fact that the price of tin 
—the country’s leading export—had almost 
doubled since 1931. Wages had lagged behind a 
rise in the cost of living resulting from currency 
devaluation. The demobilization of 50,000 army 
men and repatriation of 30,000 war prisoners con- 
tributed to unemployment. A general strike pro- 
vided the immediate cause for the governmental 
overturn. 

Colonel Toro has announced that his régime 


Page Two = 


will establish “a frank and just state socialism” 
and effect complete social reform. His pro- 
gram is seemingly designed to improve the condi- 
tions of the working classes at the expense of the 
wealthy ruling group. The state is to assume in- 
creased control of economic life and new taxes are 
pledged against absentee capital and uncultivated 
land. The declaration that the new government 
would recognize all international treaties made by 
the previous administration has allayed fears that 
the revolution might threaten the Chaco peace. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


His Majesty the President of Brazil, by Ernest Hambloch. 
New York, Dutton, 1936. $3.00 
An argument that the origin of Brazil’s troubles lies in 
the Presidential, rather than the parliamentary, form of 
government. 


Balance or Chaos: A New Balance in World Basic Indus- 
tries, by Scoville Hamlin. New York, Richard R. Smith, 
1936. $2.00 
Proposes that states be represented in the League 

Assembly on a basis of units of wealth and population. 


Foreign Policy in the Far East, by Taraknath Das. New 
York, Longmans Green, 1936. $2.00 
Contains illuminating analysis of nineteenth century 
imperialist politics in the Far East; much less satisfactory 
on current issues. 


China Changes, by Gerald Yorke. New York, Scribners, 
1936. $2.50 
A travelogue combined with a general discussion of 
China’s problems, valuable chiefly for its first-hand ac- 
counts of the Fukien Rebellion (1933-1934) and the 
Japanese invasion of Jehol (1933). 


Propaganda and the News, by Will Irwin. New York, 
Whittlesey House, McGraw-Hill, 1935. $2.75 
Pungent observations of a seasoned newspaperman. 


The Agricultural Crisis, by Joseph M. Goldstein. New 
York, John Day, 1935. $4.00 
A rather poorly written and organized discussion of the 
difficulties facing agriculture in the chief producing 
countries. 


An Economist’s Confession of Faith, by Gilbert Jackson. 
New York, Macmillan, 1935. $2.75 
A Canadian economist attributes our present-day 
troubles to selfishness and greed, and calls for a change 
of heart and conscience. 


World Court Reports, edited by Manley O. Hudson. Vols. I 
and II. Washington, Carnegie Endowment for Interna- 
tional Peace, 1934-1935. $5.00 
A collection of the advisory opinions and judgments of 

the Permanent Court of International Justice, including a 

useful history of each case. 


Political Handbook of the World, 1936, edited by W. H. 
Mallory. New York, Harper, 1936, for Council on For- 
eign Relations. $2.50 
Compact, valuable survey of the period. 


The Commonwealth of the Philippines, by George A. Mal- 
colm. New York, Appleton-Century, 1936. $5.00 
A general survey, paying especial attention to the new 
government. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 34, JuNE 19, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiig Bugii, President; EstHerR G. Ocprn, Secretary; VERA MIcHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| 


a 


TOL. 


| 


KF 
ing 
con: 
the 
of ; 
poil 
has 
deb 
mit 
r 
tail 
dec 
the 
dir 
cre 
is 
eac 
to 
ad 
acc 
nit 
tee 
nis 
col 
ea 
tio 
re] 
pr 
ar 


Sei 


bu 
fr 
of 


