







e of 
ent, 
ame 
and 
con- 


iths, 
Dpu- 
rish- 

the 
r to 


ugh 
read 
Dres- 
ning 
itent 
apse 
ope- 
jap 
ina 
rent- 
The 
s the 
cult 
h of 
> an 
nder 
by a 


evel. | 


| his 
nese 
» the 


ES 


A ss0- 
New 


been 
r has 
es at 
ween 
Mr. 
con- 
g all 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


veusral Liorary 
Vaiversity of Wichizan 


Ann Arhor. Wichiean 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 43 


Auoust 10, 1945 





WILL ATOMIC BOMB MAKE. INVASION OF JAPAN UNNECESSARY? 


ae atomic bomb which struck the Japanese city 
of Hiroshima on August 5 will alter the outlook 
and intensify the problems of our entire civilization. 
Although at this moment the exact effects of the 
new weapon are unknown, we can be sure that the 
“impenetrable cloud of dust and smoke” still hang- 
ing over Hiroshima hides from our view the rem- 
nants of much of our present-day world, as well as 
the ruins of an enemy army center. 

The first question that most Americans must have 
asked themselves is whether the war with Japan will 
soon be over as a result of the atomic bomb. It is 
still too early to give an answer, but there is now a 
far greater possibility than before that Tokyo will 
reconsider its rejection of the Anglo-American- 
Chinese ultimatum issued at Potsdam on July 26. In 
his statement of August 6, President Truman told 
the Japanese that, if they do not accept these terms, 
“they may expect a rain of ruin from the air, the 
like of which has never been seen on this earth.” 
Rut it is important to note that he followed this with 
the threat that “behind this air attack will follow 
sea and land forces in such numbers and power as 
they have not yet seen and with the fighting skill of 
which they are already aware.” Evidently Mr. Tru- 
man does not feel that the new discovery excludes 
the possibility of our having to land and fight on 
Japanese soil. Nevertheless, if matters come to this 


| point, our problems ought to be far simpler than we 


could have imagined before the development of 
atomic explosives. 

The announcements of August 6 have crowded 
many other subjects into the background. It is there- 
fore all the more important that we pick up the lines 
of thought that were dropped so soon after the Pots- 
dam conference and that we appreciate the signifi- 
cance of that meeting for the Far East. 

While the Big Three were still in session, the 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


suggestion was made in this country that they might 
issue a joint ultimatum demanding Japan’s uncondi- 
tional surrender. Actually what emerged from the 
conference was the three-power declaration of July 
26 signed by the United States, Britain and China, 
and not by the Soviet Union, although the Russians 
may have been in on the discussions. It is no exag- 
geration, however, to say that the Potsdam Declara- 
tion of the Big Three was a severe blow to Tokyo’s 
hopes that in some way it could secure a nego- 
tiated peace. The unity of the leading powers on the 
future of Germany, the most important problem be- 


fore them, and the stern measures adopted to destroy ° 


the economic and political foundations of German 
might, must strike fear into the hearts of Japanese 
leaders. This seems particularly true, in view of the 
use of the atomic bomb. | 

ALTERNATIVES FOR JAPAN. When the 
Anglo-American-Chinese ultimatum to Japan was re- 
jected by Premier Suzuki, the Potsdam decisions on 
Germany were still in the making, and the. existence 
of the atomic bomb was an Allied secret. Today 
Tokyo is in a position to realize the consequences of 
continued resistance and to compare the terms of the 
ultimatum with those imposed on a partner nation 
which refused to surrender short of utter defeat. The 
German state has completely disappeared for the time 
being, German industry is to be reduced to a shadow 
of its former strength, and large sections of the pre- 
war Reich have been assigned to Poland and Russia. 
On the other hand, the Potsdam ultimatum to Japan, 
although demanding total disarmament, punishment 
of war criminals, the break-up of the Japanese em- 
pire and the end of war industry, promised a limited 
occupation (confined to designated points), terti- 
torial integrity of the home islands, access to raw 
materials from abroad, eventual participation in 
world trade, and withdrawal of the occupying forces 


ee. ee al 
- 
AUG 1 7 1945 






























SS - eas 











after “there has been established in accordance with 
the freely expressed will of the Japanese people a 
peacefully inclined and cesponsible government.” Al- 
though the language of the ultimatum admits of 
more than one interpretation, the general tenor of 
the note suggested that the Japanese state would 
not be destroyed and that Japan would be allowed 
to retain the Emperor system if the other conditions 
were met. 

Japan's rejection of the Potsdam ultimatum was 
the first practical test of official Allied efforts to split 
the Emperor and associated circles from the extreme 
militarist clique in the ruling coalition. Previously 
the soundness or unsoundness of this approach had 
been entirely a matter of theory. Now, under the 
impact of the Japanese rejection, some American 
commentators are urging that we alter our policy 
by seeking to drive a wedge between the Japanese 
people and their rulers as a whole, rather than be- 
tween different sections of the Japanese leaders. This 
is a sensible point of view, for the time has cer- 
tainly come to recognize that our enemy is the entire 
Japanese state with its aggressive political and eco- 
nomic structure centered about the Emperor. But it 
would be a mistake to think that if we concentrate 
on the people of Japan, we will have to give up our 


‘ Page Two 
after the accomplishment of Allied objectives and 








efforts to split Japan’s ruling groups. 

SPLITTING THE TOKYO GOVERNMENT. 
On the contrary, the more effectively we divide the 
Japanese people from their rulers, the more success. 
ful will we be in sharpening whatever differences 
there are inside the Tokyo government. For it js 
obvious that when a régime is in a state of military 
crisis it tends to fly apart more easily if it is at the 
same time under strong pressure from its own people 
than if it is able to operate with an assurance of 


domestic stability and is obliged to think only of the | 


foreign enemy. 

At present our propaganda to Japan is quite prop. 
erly centered on the effects of atomic bombings, but 
it would be a mistake to imagine that political ques. 
tions have ceased to be of importance to us. It is pos. 
sible that our new weapon may of itself be enough 
to force the Japanese to yield, but we do not yet 
know this to be a fact. And, in any event, the political 
issues that have occupied our attention in wartime 
will still face us in a defeated Japan, although in 
somewhat changed form. Despite the development 
of the atomic bomb, this is still a political and eco- 
nomic world and the existence of superior weapons 
ought to be accompanied by the development of a 
superior policy. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


BIG THREE SETTLE ALLIED ACCOUNTS WITH GERMANY AT POTSDAM 


The Potsdam Declaration, issued on August 2 at 
the close of what history is to know as the Berlin 
Conference, has as its central theme the liquidation 
of Germany's military power and its industrial poten- 
tialities to wage war in the future. Germany is not 
broken up into three or four states, as had been pro- 
posed earlier by some Allied commentators. The Big 
Three agree that in the four zones of occupation 
(American, British, Russian and French) uniform 
treatment shall be accorded to the German popula- 
tion “so far as is practicable”; and that during the 
period of occupation Germany will be treated as a 
single economic unit. The unification of the Allies’ 
policy toward Germany, which was urgently needed, 
is thus provided for. 

But German territory does not remain intact. It 
is in reality split into two areas—the area east of the 
Oder, which is to be divided between Russia and 
Poland, “pending final determination” of their re- 
spective western frontiers; and the area west of the 
Oder, divided into the four Allied zones of occupa- 
tion. Most of East Prussia, cradle of Prussian mil- 
itarism, including the city of Koenigsberg, is assigned 
to Russia. The remainder of East Prussia, the port 
of Danzig (a bone of contention between Germany 
and Poland during the inter-war years), and Silesia, 
rich in coal and industrial installations, is assigned 
to Poland—in compensation for Eastern Poland, 


taken by Russia in 1939. This territorial exchange 
had been approved, in principle, at the Yalta Con- 
ference. In spite of France’s often-proclaimed desire 
for the Rhineland, no territorial cessions in the west 
are envisaged in the Potsdam Declaration. 
TERRITORIAL CESSIONS CREATE FUTURE 
THREAT. No one familiar with the sufferings and 
depredations inflicted by the Germans on neighbor- 
ing nations would urge a “soft peace,” or any at 
rangement calculated to perpetuate Germany's mili- 
tary power. But it may well be asked whether the 
Big Three are not making to Poland a dubious, and 
potentially dangerous gift. True, the Potsdam Dec 
laration provides for the transfer of German popula 
tions, not only in Poland but also in Hungary and 
Czechoslovakia (which remembers all too vividly the 
problem created by the presence of three and a half 
million Sudeten Germans within its borders). This 
transfer, which will at least forestall agitation by 
German minority groups for reunion with the Reich, 
was already under way. The Big Three, however, 
agree that any transfers that take place “should be 
effected in an orderly and humane manner’ ; and fe 
quest the governments of Germany's three eastern 
neighbors to suspend further expulsions until they 
have had time to examine the reports of their repre 
sentatives on the Allied Control Council concerning 
the time and rate at which “further transfers could 






































































of a 


in ge 
“On- 
sire 
west 


and 
bor- 
’ af- 
nili- 

the 
and 


yula- 
and 
y the 
half 
This 
1 by 
eich, 
ever, 
d be 
d re- 
stern 
they 
epre- 
ning 
‘ould 














iecarried out having regard to the present situation 
jp Germany.” 

Germany's territorial losses and the transfer to the 
Reich of German populations estimated at between 
j0and 15 million are bound to have serious reper- 
qssions on the German economy, whose activities 
ye drastically curtailed by the Potsdam Declaration. 
jt was to be expected that all production of items 
“directly necessary to a war economy’ would be 
‘igidly controlled and restricted to Germany's ap- 

wed post-war peacetime needs”; that productive 
apacity not needed for permitted production would 
ie removed or destroyed; and that the production 
of arms, ammunition and implements of war would 
be prohibited and prevented. In view of the monop- 
dlistic, far-reaching control exercised by certain Ger- 
mn industries through cartels and other arrange- 
ments, it was also to be expected that provision 
would be made for decentralization of German 
eonomy. 

TWO ZONES OF REPARATIONS. For the col- 
kction of reparations Germany is again divided into 
two areas. Russia is free to remove food, machinery, 
tools and so on from the area it occupies, with the 
proviso that out of its share it is to settle Poland’s 
daims to reparations. The claims of the United 
Sates, Britain and other countries “entitled to repa- 
rations” (including, presumably, France) are to be 
met from the zones occupied by the Western powers 
aid from Germany's assets abroad. Russia, already 
ich in gold, makes no claim to gold captured by the 
Allies in Germany; but it is accorded 25 per cent of 
feparations from the western zone. Of this share 15 
per cent, to be collected “‘in the first place” from the 
metallurgical, chemical and machine manufacturing 
industries “unnecessary for the German peace econ- 
omy,” is to be exchanged for an equivalent value 
of food, coal, potash, timber, petroleum, and so on 
from the Russian-occupied zone; and 10 per cent 
isto be transferred to Russia on account of repara- 
tions without payment or exchange of any kind. 

The Potsdam Declaration provides that, in organ- 
zing the German economy, “primary emphasis shall 
be given to the development of agriculture and 
peaceful domestic industries.” This is a desirable 
objective provided Germany retains areas capable of 
producing sufficient food for its population. It is in 
this connection, particularly, that the assignment of 
Germany's richest agricultural areas in the east to 
Poland and Russia, plus the transfer of several mil- 
lion Germans into an agriculturally impoverished 


Page Three 








——— 








Reich, raise serious questions as to the viability of 
the economic plans drawn up for post-war Germany. 

The aim of the Berlin conferees—an aim that will 
have the hearty approval of all of Germany’s victims 
—is “to maintain in Germany living standards not 
exceeding the average of the standards of living of 
European countries” (exclusive of Britain and Rus- 
sia). This is important if Germany's neighbors are 
to recover from the losses of manpower, technical 
skill, and productive resources they suffered during 
the war. But the European countries which proved 
economically and militarily unable to resist Ger- 
many will benefit only negatively from arrangements 
projected for Germany's economy unless the Big 
Three aid them to develop their economies to the 
level attainable by the technically superior Germans; 
and provide them with the manufactured goods they 
need in quantities and at prices comparable to the 
terms that might otherwise be offered by a peaceable 
German industry. The Potsdam Declaration provides 
in every conceivable way for methods to make Ger- 
many weak. But it is strikingly barren of provisions 
to make the rest of Europe strong. 

Such provisions must find a place in future agree- 
ments to be negotiated by the Council of Ministers 
of the Big Five, created at the Berlin Conference, 
which is to have its headquarters in London. This 
Council will have as its first task the drawing up of 
peace treaties with other ex-enemy countries, Italy, 
Rumania, Hungary and Bulgaria. But in the course 
of settling Allied accounts with Germany and its 
satellites, we must not forget the needs and aspira- 
tions of countries in Europe which bore the brunt 
of German aggression and are now struggling with 
painful problems of rehabilitation. It would be com- 
forting to believe that Germany's lightning con- 
quest of Europe was due solely to its superior mil- 
itary and industrial power. But the trial of Marshal 
Pétain, the memoirs of Reynaud, the diaries of 
Ciano, all underline a lesson we should have learned 
long ago: that fundamental political and economic 
weaknesses in countries attacked or threatened by 
the Germans greatly facilitated Hitler's initial vic- 
tories. These weaknesses must be clearly understood 
and unremittingly corrected if we are to give the 
Germans an example of how to reconstruct their 
life on “a democratic and peaceful basis,” as pro- 
vided in the Potsdam Declaration; and if we are to 
discover for ourselves how to assure conditions of 
security and stability for the rest of the world. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 43, AuGusr 10, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Last, Secretary; Vara Micnnizs Duan, Ezitor. Entered as 
ttcond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address om membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> s: 





Produced under union conditions and compesed and printed by union labor. 














LO OO OO ee eee eee Oe eee 





a ie BOR aS Chis ae PR AAS 


eEeEE———EE———E————————EYEe 


nat 


( 


{ 
/ 
i. 


Washington News Letter Sex 





WS 





POTSDAM PROGRAM FOR GERMANY SPELLS NEW EUROPEAN ECONOMmy 


By their decision to weaken the German economy, 
the Big Three at Potsdam undertook a task that must 
be well done or the prospect of peace will be endan- 
gered. The Potsdam agreement among President 
Truman, Prime Minister Attlee and Marshal Stalin, 
announced on August 2, eliminates Germany as the 
industrial heart of Europe. That bold step was taken 
in the face of advice from a number of experts in 
both the United States and Britain that to reduce 
drastically Germany's industrial potential would 
mean a serious lowering of the general European 
economic level. Since, however, this has been done, 
the Potsdam program should be followed by agree- 
ment on a plan for establishing easy commercial in- 
terchange and a workable economic interdependency 
among non-German European states which will not 
only maintain but elevate pre-war economic condi- 
tions on the continent. The Potsdam negotiators 
stressed their determination to isolate Germany eco- 
nomically in their announced desire to “reduce the 
need for imports’’ by that country. The absence of 
imports would make it unnecessary for Germany to 
develop an export industry as the means of financing 


_ imports, and therefore further reduce its chances of 


returning to its pre-war status as one of the world’s 
major industrial powers. 

ECONOMIC SECTIONS REFLECT AMERICAN 
VIEWS. The economic sections of the Potsdam 
agreement reflect in large measure the suggestions of 
the United States delegation, and indicate that Pres- 
ident Truman is committing this country to long-- 
term participation in European affairs. Having as- 
sumed a share of the responsibility for the future of 
Germany, the United States can ill neglect the future 
of its neighbors. 

The economic settlement of Germany is set forth 
in two chapters of the Potsdam agreement. The chap- 
ter on economic principles aims at elimination of the 
industrial cartels by which the Reich tied to itself 
the economies of close and distant neighbors; in- 
stead it guides Germany toward the development of 
agricultural pursuits and small industries rather than 
the machine-age enterprises that for a century have 
been the backbone of the Reich. 

The chapter on reparations, requiring that Ger- 
many submit to removal of industrial capital equip- 
ment to the Soviet Union, Britain, the United States 
“and other countries entitled to reparations,” facil- 
itates the Reich’s movement toward an agricultural 


FOR VICTORY * BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


economy. The granting to Poland of a portion of 


Germany up to the Oder deprives it of additional | 


heavy industry and fuel resources. 

The reparations settlement, carrying out the policy 
of “reparations in kind” agreed on at the Crime 
Conference in February, sets Germany on an entire. 
ly different road from the one it traveled after Worlj 
War I. The Versailles peace called for monet 
reparations; it thus led economists of the stature of 
John Maynard Keynes to urge bolstering of the Ger. 
man economy, because the more it produced and sold 
the more easily it could meet the reparations debt 
The new approach to reparations does not, of course, 
give complete assurance that international tensions 
will not arise after this war, but it is based on, 
more realistic concept of the relation between victor 
and vanquished. 

The economic agreement underlined the unity of 
the three powers represented at Potsdam. The 
agreed that “during the period of occupation Ger 
many shall be treated as a single economic unit” de 
spite the fact that the country is divided into zones 
of occupation. However, the complete economic set. 
tlement of Germany must await an ancillary under. 
standing with France, which, not represented at Pots. 
dam, advocates the severance from Germany of three 
major industrial regions: the Saar, which France is 
said to want for itself; the Rhineland, which it prob- 
ably will seek in the name of security; and the Ruhr. 
After all agreements have been completed, however, 
the question will remain whether the new Germany 
can provide at least a subsistence standard of living 
for its large population. 

IMPROVES U.S. SECURITY. The United States 
buttressed its security through the agreement in the 
economic principles chapter that ‘‘at the earliest prac 
ticable date the Germany economy shall be decentral- 
ized for the purpose of eliminating the present ex 
cessive concentration of economic power as exempli 
fied in particular by cartels, syndicates, trusts and 


other monopolistic arrangements.” The international 


cartel, especially I. G. Farben, was one of Germanys 
chief agencies of influence in the Latin American re 
publics, where the United States combatted Nazi con- 
trol long before this country actually entered the wat. 
The cartel also brought about the alliance of many 
important American industries with German entet- 
prises—a situation which this country wishes to pre 
vent from recurring in the future. Bair BOLLES 





491: 

















