





eace 
nili- 
y Six 
2 di- 
nate 
tates 
ador 
5 On 
eral 
hief 
nder 
hief 
eral 
man 
> to 
state 
iter- 


ssue 
5 of 
retly 
and 
y as 
in a 
SR. 


COn- | 


uni- 
dent 
ples 
per- 


own 


rom 
- aid 
dom 
vio- 
zing 
the 
yples 
ents 
ES 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
“Sugra, Mlovary 


-BRIODICAL ROS ns Valy Nov 
eo BRAR’ ersit 2 8] 
4 - rs poe v of Uichigag 945 


Any Arbor. Nich 




















FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 5 


NOVEMBER 16, 1945 





ALLIES MUST PUSH SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION OF GERMANY 


Paris.—The late autumn sun is kind to the fair 
countryside of France. Seen from the air, the land- 
scape unrolls like a luminous tapestry, with its tender 
blues and greens and yellows, and the Seine shim- 
meting like spun silver in the sunlight. Then, on 
landing, the ineffable, never-fading beauty of Paris 
evokes so many memories of a glorious past as to 
efface the miseries of the present. Here is the other 
side of the German problem: the side so seldom dis- 
cussed or understood in Britain and the United 
States, the ever-present nightmare that the Germans, 
seemingly defeated, will rise in one more effort to 
obliterate France. As a priest rouses the echoes of 
crowded Notre Dame by his account of the heart- 
trending sufferings endured by his flock in a Vosges 
village during the German occupation, as one talks 
with those who returned from prison camps and de- 
portation, and thinks of the many others who suc- 
cumbed in the bitterest kind of exile, it is more diffi- 
cult than it was among the ruins of Berlin to be dis- 
tressed by the hardships of the Germans. 


Already, appealing to the sense of fairness of the 
British and Americans, the Germans lament their 
plight—they who for the most part showed little 
sympathy for the victims of the Nazis even in their 
own midst. Yet if we were to sink to the Nazis’ level 
in our treatment of Germany, we would, in effect, 
have been defeated by Hitler, would have become 
tainted with the inhumanity of Nazism. Here is our 
cruel dilemma: we could in theory shoot every tenth 
German in revenge for what was done by the Nazis 
to other peoples, but none of the Allies—and this is 
just as true of the victims of Germany, like the 
French, the Poles, and the Russians, as it is of the 
British and ourselves—is prepared to claim an eye 
for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. At the same time, 
while we are unwilling to shoot Germans in cold 
blood, neither can we in all conscience allow them 


to die of slow starvation. 


ALLIES’ ECONOMIC DILEMMA. The economic 
problem of Germany boils down to this: how are the 
Allies to assure the Germans a subsistence standard 
of living without at the same time permitting them 
to restore their economy to a point at which they 
can again prove a threat to Europe and the rest of the 
world? There are several basic considerations that 
must be taken into account in framing a long-term 
economic program for Germany, and only a long- 
term program is worth considering at all. 

i. The destruction from which Germany is now 
suffering is a direct result of the war. The Germans, 
as British Foreign Secretary Bevin pointed out in his 
House of Commons speech of October 26, were of- 
fered several opportunities by the Allies to escape 
this destruction through surrender, but were either 
unwilling or unable to give up until Germany had 
been invaded. 

2. This destruction has, for the time being, de- 
prived Germany of military power, but a thorough 
inventory, according to some observers on the spot, 
will reveal that many of Germany's industries can be 
easily reclaimed, given the technical efficiency of the 
Germans, which remains superior to that of most of. 
their neighbors—provided of course the Germans 
can obtain from abroad the raw materials they need. 

3. There is no disagreement among the occupying 
powers about the necessity of eliminating industries 
required solely for war purposes—armaments of all 
kinds, synthetic oil and rubber, chemicals used for 
warfare. Disagreement begins when the question of 
types and numbers of industries to be retained by 
Germany for peacetime purposes is raised. Studies 
thus far made of Germany's economic needs reveal 
the great, perhaps intractable, difficulties of reaching 

a practicable agreement on this point. 

4. As passions cool off, there is a growing ten- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 














dency to wondér whether destruction of industries 
other than those used specifically for war is desirable, 
not only from the point of view of,the Germans but 
from the larger poitit of View of European economy. 
The Potsdam yardstick to make Germany's standard 
of living no higher than that of its neighbors, exclu- 
sive of Britain and Russia, could readily become a 
premium for inefficiency and give some, at least, of 
Germany's neighbors the feeling that they need not 
strive to strengthen their economic position and im- 
prove their social conditions since Germany would in 
any case be prevented by the Allies from rising above 
a certain low level of production. 

5. Meanwhile, the two major mistakes already 
made by the Allies with respect to Germany—the 
creation of four zones, communications between 
which remain of the most tenuous nature, and the 
cession of Germany's most productive agricultural 
areas to Poland, which lacks the mechanical imple- 
ments to continue their development—gravely ham- 
per the establishment in Germany of even a subsis- 
tence standard of living. If the present situation per- 
sists, the Allies may be indefinitely forced to furnish 
Germany with food and possibly other essentials; 
and Germany could easily become a vast WPA pro- 
ject, dependent on the hand-outs of the occupying 
powers, and that means Britain and the United States. 

A PROGRAM AFTER POTSDAM. To cope with 
the multifarious problems that have emerged in Ger- 
many, many of which could have been anticipated 
long ago, the Allies need to reconsider the program 
they adopted at Potsdam—a program which, to use 
the words of a Parisian review, can be described as 
the “Peace of Damocles.” It may be too late to reverse 
the cession of Germany's principal agrarian regions 
to Poland, greatly aggravated by the deportation of 
Germans from that area (as well as from the terri- 
tory ceded to Russia and from the Sudetenland), al- 
though many of the Poles who were sent into those 
areas to settle have already returned home disap- 
pointed because they do not have the means to cul- 
tivate German farms. 

But three measures, at least, could be weighed by 
the Allies. First, interzonal communications could be 
restored by the creation envisaged in the Potsdam 


Page Two 











—e 
———es 


declaration of five central administrative depart. 
ments under the supervision of the Allied Controj 
Council. France's opposition to the creation of q 
central administration is due to fear that this measure 
will lead directly to revival of Germany's milita 
power. This is a legitimate fear, and the other three 
occupying powers should take steps to alleviate it by 
preventing the military resurgence of the Germans 
through a second measure, and that is by depriving 
German industrialists and big landowners of owner. 
ship of their properties. The Russians have already 
done this by breaking up the Junker estates in East 
Prussia, a step many American commentators had 
long urged as essential for the social transformation 
of Germany. So far, we have shrunk from outright 
expropriation, except in the case of outstanding Nazi 
leaders, because of our own attachment to the con- 
cepts of private property and free enterprise. But 
surely the destruction of factories in Germany is a 
drastic alternative to change of ownership. 


It is at this point that the French proposal for 
international control of the Ruhr deserves considera- 
tion. If ownership of the mines is left in the hands 
of those who aided Hitler, this will not only make 
the French, Russians and others in Europe feel that 
Germany has a good chance of recovering its military 
power, but will convince the German workers, whose 
support we need for a more democratic political 
system, that the Allies have no intention of advanc 
ing social democracy in Germany. Third, once ownet- 
ship of Germany’s basic raw materials has been taken 
out of the hands of those who supported militarist 
policies, the Allies should consider whether control 
of German industrial production, together with the 
control they intend to exercise over exports and im- 
ports, would not be more effective in holding Ger- 
many to a peacetime economy than attempts to set 
arbitrary standards as to the extent and character of 
German production. Allied decisions regarding Ger- 


many, however, will depend in large measure on the | 


character of the relations that can be developed be- 
tween the Western powers and Russia. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The third in a series of articles on Germany.) 


FUTURE OF KOREA HINGES ON U.S.-SOVIET RELATIONS 


The ability of the great powers to deal justly with 
the peoples of the Far East is now being tested at 
a dozen different points from Surabaya to Seoul. 
Attention has naturally centered on the civil war in 
China and on the British and French campaigns 
against nationalist movements in Southeast Asia, but 
developments in the former Japanese colony of 
Korea will also bear watching for the light they 
throw on American-Soviet relations and for their 
effects on the welfare of some 25,000,000 Koreans. 


Although the people of Korea were promised inde- 
pendence “in due course” by the United States, 


Britain and China in the Cairo declaration of No- | 


vember 1943, they are confronted by the fact that, 


under arrangements which may have been drawn up | 


at Yalta, their country has been divided into two 
occupation zones along the line of the thirty-eighth 
parallel. 

DANGER OF TWO KOREAS. The northern, 
Soviet zone of occupation, bordering on the U.S.S.R 


=_ 


and M 
industt 


steel, 
ins' 


ty | militar 


Arthus 
dustri¢ 
south | 
while 
rice. | 
there | 
power 
functi 
thorit: 
cies, { 
ing a} 
coura, 
servat 
Lit 
zonal 
in the 
Sovie 
Kore 
Gern 
proac 
migh 
eight 
time 
prep 
who 
rect, 
term 
COW 
per rt 
now 
and 
ther 





viol 
} inn 








ner- 


con- 
is a 


for 
era- 
inds 
1ake 
that 
tary 


hose 


anc- 
net- 
aiken 
arist 
trol 

the 

im- 
Ger- 
> Set 
t of 
Ger- 
. the 


| be: | 


nde- 
ates, 


that, 
n up 
two 
ghth 


1efNn, 





—_—, 
—— 


and Manchuria, contains the heart of Korean heavy 
industry and produces virtually all the coal, iron, 
steel, chemicals and hydroelectric power of the 

insula. The southern, American zone, ruled by a 
military government subordinate to General Mac- 
Arthur, is a rich agricultural region with light in- 
dustries producing consumers’ goods. In the past the 
south has depended on the north for coal and power, 
while the north has been a purchaser of southern 
rice. In the period since the Japanese surrender 
there has been no interruption of the flow of electric 
power, but normal trade and railway traffic are not 
functioning between the areas. The occupying au- 
thorities also seem to be following divergent poli- 
des, for the Russians are rumored to be emphasiz- 
ing agrarian reforms, while the United States is en- 
couraging Korean leaders who have a more con- 
servative program. 





Little is known publicly about the origin of the 
zonal arrangement, but it was presumably drawn up 
in the expectation that both the United States and the 
Soviet Union would wage extended campaigns in 
Korea. Had Japan fought to virtual exhaustion, as 
Germany did, the two invading Allied armies, ap- 
proaching each other from the south and the north, 
might ultimately have met on the line of the thirty- 
eighth parallel. Meanwhile there would have been 
time, however great the difficulties, to attempt the 
preparation of a single administrative plan for the 
whole of post-war Korea. If this hypothesis is cor- 
rect, Allied arrangements were upset by the abrupt 
termination of the war, and Washington and Mos- 
cow were left to apply agreements designed for a 
period of military operations. The United States is 
now interested in breaking down the zonal barriers 
and creating a four-power trusteeship for Korea, but 
there has been no suggestion that the Russians have 
violated any pledges by maintaining a separate zone 
in northern Korea. 


SYMBOL OF BIG TWO RELATIONS. Viewed 
| purely as a technical problem, the difficulties of the 
dividing line could be overcome with ease. But in 
practice the future of Korea will be overshadowed 
by the state of American-Soviet relations in Japan 
and China. It seems unlikely, for example, that a 
solution can be found in Korea unless the United 
States and Russia find a means of settling their cur- 
tent differences on the nature of the control of 
Japan. The presence of American marines in North 
China under civil war conditions affecting Man- 





Page Three 





———— 
—————— 





churia, in which Russia has special interests, could 
also influence the Korean situation. As in Europe, 
the success or failure of the Allies in handling major 
issues cooperatively will determine their approach 
to all other problems. 


Although international issues dominate the Korean 
scene, the policies of the powers inside Korea are 
also significant. Little is known so far about the 
people the Russians have been working with in their 
area. In the American zone a multitude of Korean 
groups of all shades of opinion are operating, but the 
United States is backing conservative exile ele- 
ments rather than more liberal leaders who were 
active against Japanese rule from inside Korea. 
Special emphasis has been placed on utilizing 
members of the Korean Provisional Government, 
an exile body which was located in Chungking dur- 
ing the war years. Kim Koo, president of this régime 
is now on his way to Seoul, the Korean capital, 
under American auspices; and in mid-October 
Synghman Rhee, Washington representative of the 
exile group, arrived in Seoul as a “guest” of Gen- 
eral MacArthur's deputy, Lieutenant-General John 
R. Hodge. Subsequently, with official approval, Rhee 
undertook the task of unifying the views of the 
various Korean groups in the American zone. In 
interviews with American correspondents since his 
return to Korea he has not sought to conceal his deep- 
seated hostility toward the Russians. 


The Korean Provisional Government has never 
ruled in Korea, and its members have spent many 
years outside the country (Rhee, for example, had 
been in exile since 1919). Its existence in recent 
years has rested on official Chinese support and on 
the backing of Koreans in the United States. It has 
not, however, been recognized by any government, 
and when the question of recognition was raised 
during the war the State Department held that offi- 
cial standing should be withheld from all Korean 
groups as long as the views of the Korean nation 
were unknown. The role now assigned by the United 
States to members of the exile government and to 
other Koreans will be important in our relations 
with the Russians, for the abolition of the artificial 
dividing line of the thirty-eighth parallel requires 
not only a willingness to exchange coal for rice, but 
some kind of Soviet-American understanding on the 


Korean leaders who are to assist the occupying 
authorities. 
LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 





one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Bes) 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 5, NOovEMBER 16, 1945. 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHEeLes Dean, Editor, Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Washington News Letter 

















U.S. JOINS BRITAIN IN SURVEY OF PALESTINE PROBLEM 


Since the enunciation of the Balfour Declaration 
on November 2, 1917, leading political figures of 
the United States have advocated the establishment 
of a Jewish National Home in Palestine. Now the 
sincerity of their advocacy will be tested. The United 
States on November 13 assumed at least a limited 
responsibility for Palestine when it agreed with the 
United Kingdom that the two governments jointly 
and officially would survey the contribution Palestine 
can make toward alleviating the distress of homeless 
Jews of post-war Europe. 

SERIOUS ISSUE. The hardships of the Jew did 
not disappear with Hitler. Ninety per cent of the 
75,000 Jews in Germany are said to desire settlement 
in Palestine, and Jews have been fleeing from Poland 
southward in the hope of reaching Palestine. The 
despair of the persecuted wanderers stresses the need 
for an early and brave decision about Palestine. 

If the United States and the United Kingdom de- 
cide that Palestine can accommodate a large num- 
ber of homeless European Jews now, the White 
Paper issued by the British government in 1939 as 
an amendment to the Balfour Declaration should be 
quickly revoked. The cessation of immigration for 
which the White Paper called came on October 26, 
and if the United States and United Kingdom de- 
cide that Palestine is to be closed forever to Jewish 
immigration, they should at once find other avenues 
of escape for the unsettled Jews. President Truman 
personally favors immigration, and proposed in a let- 
ter to British Prime Minister Attlee on August 31 
that Palestine be opened to 100,000 European Jews. 
Attlee on September 16 sent Truman a letter op- 
posing the suggestion but urging the creation of a 
joint Anglo-American policy. 

Yet the decision the two countries now jointly 
make will hinge to some extent on Arab opposition. 
For Arab opponents of the National Home idea 
imply that continued Jewish immigration into Pal- 
estine will inspire Arab resistance, and the problem 
confronting the friends of the National Home is 
whether that resistance would be formidable. Presi- 
dent Roosevelt was sufficiently impressed by the Arab 
position to write King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia on 
April 5 that this country would make no decisions 
without consulting both the Arabs and the Jews. 
In a restatement of the Roosevelt policy on Octo- 
ber 18, Secretary of State Byrnes made public the 
letter to Ibn Saud. 

The total population of the Arab countries is little 


over 30,000,000, and their individual military o, 
ganizations are weak. Yet the latent threat of for 
arouses fear in some quarters that this country migh 
have to use troops to enforce the policy of keeping 
Palestine open to immigrants. The possibility of 
Arab countermoves has attracted the support of 4 
segment of the oil industry in the United States fo, 
the Arab position; Standard Oil of California anj 
the Texas Company jointly hold the rich petroleum 
concession of Saudi Arabia, and King Ibn Saud js 
the most outspoken of all Arabs against further im. 
migration. Concern lest Ibn Saud expropriate the 
concession has aroused some opposition to the Na 
tional Home among U.S. military officials, who | 
gard oil concessions as important to our security, 
State Department officials dealing with Middle East. 
ern affairs, and officers of the diplomatic missions in| 
Middle Eastern countries sympathize for the most 
part with the Arab point of view. 

DISPLAYS OF VIOLENCE. Violent outbreak 
in the areas bordering on the eastern Mediterranea 
have emphasized the determination of both Arabs 
and Jews to realize their aims. Jews in Palestine 
went on a general strike in protest against the clos 
ing of immigration. A clandestine radio station, 
Voice of Israel, on October 12, called on the Jew 
to “resist,” and sabotage in Palestine on Novem 
ber 1 halted the railroads. During November 1-3 
seven Jews were killed in riots in five Egyptian cities 
and Arabs subsequently assassinated more than 100 
Jews in Tripolitania. Arabs and Jews also have made 
their organizational strength felt. The World Zion 
ist Conference in London last August 14 asked for| 
the immigration of 1,000,000 more Jews into Pal 
estine; the Arab League, formed at Alexandria last 
March 24, has declared through Dr. Izzat George. 
Tannous, head of the Arab Office in London, that | 
force would be required to get 100,000 more Jews, 
into Palestine. 

Apparently the pressure of distressed Jews on the) 
gates of Palestine will continue whatever the United 
States and United Kingdom decide. Illegal immi- | 
gration is common, and 208 refugees, who had en| 
tered Palestine without permits, escaped from the| 
internment camp at Haifa on October 8. In measut | 
ing the possibility of violent Arab resistance to ut) 
restricted immigration, the United States and the 
United Kingdom will have to consider also the fac 
that the Jews show violence when immigration ' 
severely limited. BLAIR BOLLES 


























November 1945 


Brief Who’s Who of Candidates 


RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL: Research Director, Foreign Policy Association, and President, 
1933-39; member of Board since 1939; conducted courses in history, economics, govern- 
ment, Columbia University, Harvard, Occidental College; lecturer, Princeton, Yale, 
University of California, etc.; representative of Foreign Policy Association, Pan Ameri- 
can Conference at Havana, 1928; Chairman of Commission on Cuban Affairs, 1934; 
Round Table Editor, Fortune Magazine since 1938; author of numerous books on inter- 
national affairs. 


JosEPH P. CHAMBERLAIN: Chairman of Board, Foreign Policy Association, 1933-39; 
member of Board since 1919; Professor of Public Law, Columbia University since 1923; 
counsel, New York Charter Commission, 1935-36; member, High Commission for 
Refugees from Germany, 1933-35; Visiting Professor, Oxford University 1939-40; 
Assistant to Secretary of Treasury, 1940; member Board, Equitable Life Assurance 
Society of U.S.; writer of books and articles on international relations and law. 


PAUL U. KELLOGG: Initiator of Foreign Policy Association, 1918, and member of Board 
since 1918; editor The Survey, 1912-23, and Survey Graphic since 1921; member, Com- 
mission of Inquiry of Needs of Refugees, Emergency Red Cross Commission, Italy, 
1917; member, American Commission Ethiopian Crisis, 1935; president, National 
Conference of Social Work, 1939; member, Committee on Democratic Foreign Policy 
since 1942. 


Mrs. FREDERIC R. KING: Member, Board of Directors, Foreign Policy Association since 
1941; Managing Editor Vogue Magazine, 1921-23; President, Art Workshop of 
Rivington Neighborhood Association, Arts and Crafts for Workers, 1937-45. 


Mrs. THoMAs W. LAMONT: Member, Board of Directors, Foreign Policy Association 
since 1926; member of Board of American Association for the United Nations; member 
Committee for a Just and Lasting Peace of Federal Council of Churches; member of 
Board, Women’s Action Committee for Victory and Lasting Peace; member of Board, 
New School for Social Research, 1920-43; served on Board of China Society of America; 
on Board of Russian War Relief during the war. 


James G. McDonaALD: Chairman, Foreign Policy Association, 1919-33; member of Board 
since 1918; League of Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (Jewish and others) 
Coming from Germany, 1933-35; editorial writer on foreign affairs, The New York 
Times, 1936-38; Chairman, President's Advisory Committee on Political Refugees 
since 1938. 


JAMES GRAFTON RoGeERs: Lawyer; educator; Assistant U.S. Secretary of State, 1931-33; 
Master, Timothy Dwight College and Professor of Law, Yale University, 1935-42; 
Office of Strategic Services, Washington, D.C., 1942-43; founder, 1912, and President, 
Civic League of Denver (Colo.); president, Mayor's Advisory Council, Denver, 1923; 
member, American Bar Association; member Board of Editors American Bar Journal 
since 1942; author of many published papers and addresses; president, Foreign Bond- 
holders Protective Council, Inc., N. Y. C. 


EUSTACE SELIGMAN: Member, Board of Directors, Foreign Policy Association since 1926; 
lawyer, partner, firm Sullivan & Cromwell; Trustee, Amherst College; Director Legal 
Aid Society; member Exec. Com. Civil Service Reform Association; trustee; Ethical 
Culture Society; public interest director Federal Home Loan Bank of New York. 


ROBERT J. Watt: Member, Board of Directors, Foreign Policy Association since 1942; 
v. p. Mass. State Fed. of Labor, 1932-37; American Workers delegate to Geneva, 1936- 
40; member, President Roosevelt's Commission to England and Sweden, 1938; alternate 
member, National Defense Mediation Board; Chmn. labor advisory commission, Fed- 
eral Communications Commission; member, Federal Advisory Board, Vocational Edu- 
cation; international representative A. F. of L. since 1936. 








The Annual Meeting of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 
will be held at The Waldorf-Astoria, New York, — 


on Saturday, December 15, 1945. 


The brief business meeting will be held at 12:15, immediately preceding the luncheon meeting. 
FRANK ROSS McCOY, President 


———_—__ 





PROXY FOR BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


The candidates listed below have been nominated to serve on the Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy Association, 
Incorporated, as indicated, and have expressed their willingness to act if elected. The word ‘‘Re-election” appears after the names 
of the present members of the Board of Directors who have consented to run again. 


Persons other than those nominated by the Nominating Committee are eligible to election, and space is provided on 
the proxy for naming such other candidates. Attention is called to the fact that: 


“All members of the Board of Directors shall be members of the Association who are so circumstanced 
that they can attend the meetings of the Board regularly.” 
Constitution, Article IV, Paragraph 3. 
In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the candidates receiving the largest number of votes cast at the 
annual meeting, December 15, 1945, will be declared elected. 
Please note that proxies cannot be used 


1. unless received at National Headquarters not later than Wednesday, December 12, 1945. 
2. unless the proxy returned is signed by the member. 


Only members of the Association who are citizens of the United States have voting privileges. 
&P & 


Nominating Committee: Mr. Francis T. P. Plimpton, Chairman 
Mrs. Henry Barbey Mrs. Joseph R. Swan 

Mrs. Henry Goddard Leach Mr. Harrison Tweed 

Mr. George Roberts 


Please cut along this line and sign and return the proxy to the office of the 
Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 








PROXY 


Put cross (x) beside names of candidates of your choice. 
Vote for one in the Class of 1947. 
Vote for eight in the Class of 1948. 


I authorize Frank Ross McCoy or Walter Wilgus or a substitute to vote for directors of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, as 
indicated below: 
CLASS OF 1947 





JAMES GRAFTON ROGERS 












































, CLASS OF 1948 

RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL JAMES G. McDONALD 

RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
JOSEPH P. CHAMBERLAIN EUSTACE SELIGMAN 

RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
PAUL KELLOGG MRS. FREDERIC R. KING 

RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
MRS. THOMAS W. LAMONT ROBERT J. WATT 

RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 








| 


FE 


























(A brief “Who's Who” of the candidates is given on the back of this page.) 


SEEDY Wicsibesedias td clisoshienliniensctedinish nsidinteiyenedacbetaterivenniceonin nila 





