ngaged 
which 
‘S most 
ce) any 
ropean 
e Ger. 
| is at- 
United 
nitting 
ly and 
Vince 
ir real 
S more 
if the 
rument 
1 other 
ready 
ssisted 
alizing 
| War. 
erhaps 
imself, 
his re- 
iny of 

must 
of the 
‘ish an 
nit im- 
ind to 
eutral, 


able it | 


ut.”” It 
it will 
yy Mr. 
expect 


EAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XIX, No. 44 Aucust 23, 1940 


of March 3, 1879. 


SECOND CLASS MAIL 


For a timely study of the strategic importance of 
European possessions in the Americas, read: 
EUROPEAN COLONIES IN THE WESTERN 


HEMISPHERE 
by A. RANDLE ELLIOTT 


25c 


August 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


GERMANY 


“BLOCKADES” 


BRITAIN 


THE intensive air attacks on Britain, together with 
the proclamation of a “total blockade” of the 
British Isles, throw some light on the methods by 
which Germany hopes to subjugate its enemy. They 
suggest that the Reich may not actually invade Brit- 
ain until the Nazi air force has definitely estab- 
lished its supremacy and until the British people and 
industry have been greatly weakened by starvation. 

The German government announced its blockade 
on August 17 in reprisal for the “illegal” and “bru- 
tal” naval warfare allegedly conducted by the 
British. It declared the waters around the British 
Isles a zone of military operations and forbade all 
neutral vessels to enter on pain of immediate de- 
struction. German planes and submarines will there- 
fore sink all ships within this area without warning 
or attempting to ascertain either the character of 
the vessel or the nature of its cargo. This action is 
reminiscent of the inauguration of unrestricted sub- 
marine warfare by Germany in January 1917, when 
the Imperial German government also proclaimed 
“blockade zones” within which ships would proceed 
“at their risk and peril.” 

The adoption of this measure during the first 
World War precipitated a rupture of diplomatic 
relations with the United States and shortly after- 
wards brought this country into the war. Although 
American merchantmen are this time debarred from 
British waters under the Neutrality Act, the de- 
termination of Germany to establish a broad war 
zone has already given rise to a controversy with 
the United States concerning the safety of the refu- 
gee ship American Legion which sailed from Pet- 
samo, Finland, on August 16. This ship was scheduled 
to pass directly north of Scotland through the area 
which President Roosevelt himself closed to travel 
and trade by American vessels and citizens. The 
German government informed Washington on 
August 17 that it disclaimed responsibility for the 


safety of the American Legion because its course 
would bring it too close to the zone of military 
operations. The following day the United States 
countered with a note emphasizing its expectation 
“that the vessel will not suffer molestation by any 
action undertaken by the German armed forces.” 

A WAR OF ATTRITION? As far as Britain is 
concerned, it appears confident about the ultimate 
outcome of the aerial and sea warfare launched by 
the Nazis. The German communiqués regarding 
the air losses inflicted on Britain continue to be flatly 
contradicted in London, which claims punishing air 
raids against factories and other military objectives 
in German-controlled territory. The German air 
force is still superior in numbers, but apparently in- 
ferior in quality, to the British. While the Germans 
have the advantage of bases close to British waters 
and industrial regions, Britain probably has larger 
and better supplies of high-octane aviation fuel. 
According to reports of eye witnesses, the air dam- 
age so far done to Britain is still quite indecisive. 
Nor do the British accept the Nazi claim that 
5,000,000 tons of merchant shipping have been sunk, 
and 1,500,000 more tons rendered “useless” since 
the beginning of the war. Until recently the British 
Navy was still convoying vessels through the Eng- 
lish Channel despite German boasts that the Channel 
had been swept clear of shipping. On both sides in- 
dustry is replacing airplanes almost as rapidly as 
they are shot down. Under the circumstances the 
“preliminary” stage of the Battle of Britain may 
last a long time. 

If the war becomes one of attrition, American 
assistance to the United Kingdom may be a more 
important factor than was anticipated when most 
observers expected a Blitzkrieg. That this aid meets 
with the general approval of the American people 
was again confirmed on August 17 when Wendell 
Willkie, in his acceptance speech, declined to make 


it a campaign issue and endorsed in principle the 
President's course of placing “the material resources 
of this nation” at the disposal of “opponents of 
force.” Mr. Willkie remained silent, however, on 
the proposal to sell or transfer some fifty recondi- 
tioned American destroyers, which may be of par- 
ticular value to the British Navy at this moment. In 
the waters within easy reach of Nazi airplanes Brit- 
ain must place its primary reliance on small, fast 
destroyers for patrol and convoy duty. Losses in this 
category of ships have been so heavy, that the Brit- 
ish government proposed the purchase of American 
destroyers more than two months ago. 


ITALY THREATENS GREECE. While Britain 
and Germany are locked in a life-and-death struggle, 
Italy appears to be preparing a blow in the Eastern 
Mediterranean. Italo-Greek relations approached a 
critical stage after the Italian press accused the 
Greek government of complicity in the murder of 
an Albanian irredentist leader. Coupled with this 
accusation were intimations that Italy would take 
advantage of the presence of a small Albanian 
minority in Epirus to claim that Greek province for 
Italian-controlled Albania. Reports of similar de- 
mands on Jugoslavia also began to circulate. On 
August 15, the Greek cruiser Helle was torpedoed 
by an “unidentified” submarine; and the following 
day two Greek destroyers were attacked from the 
air. While Italy has disavowed responsibiilty for 
the sinking of the Helle, Greece fears that these 
incidents are the opening guns of an Italian offen- 
sive designed to force the country into full compli- 
ance with the wishes of the Axis powers. After the 
conquest of Somaliland, which Britain yielded to 
superior Italian forces on August 19, Italy is ap- 
parently preparing for a concerted attack on Egypt 
and the Suez Canal. This drive would be greatly 
facilitated if Italy were able to utilize Greek harbors 
and territorial waters as bases for operations against 
the British fleet. While Greece has so far refused to 


Page Two 


—— 


repudiate the British guarantee of its independence 
and territorial integrity, Premier Metaxas seems more 
inclined to rely on Germany for protection. If the 
Reich steps in, however, it will undoubtedly exag 
its price. 

Meanwhile, Rumania is already paying the cog 
of Nazi “protection.” In return, apparently, for cop. 
tinued tolerance of its existence as a state, Rumani, 
is being compelied to settle all territorial disputes 
with its neighbors. After negotiations lasting two 
weeks the Bucharest government reached an agree. 
ment on August 17 providing for the cession of the 
Southern Dobruja to Bulgaria, which had lost this 
province in 1913. On August 15 Rumania likewise 
opened conversations with Hungary whose claim ty 
most of Transylvania apparently received the a 
proval of the Axis powers in the Munich confer. 
ence of July 10. The Hungarian delegation is re 
ported to be demanding the return of two-thirds of 
Transylvania, which Rumania acquired in 1919. Ac 
cording to the Rumanian census of 1930, the popu. 
lation of this province, together with the adjoining 
districts of Crisana and Maramures, amounts to 
4,600,405 of which a majority—2,696,797—are Ru. 
manian, and only 1,255,437 Hungarian. The ethno- 
graphic picture is confused by the fact that a large 
part of the Hungarian element (the so-called 
Szeklers) live in the extreme eastern part of the 
territory, separated from the remaining Hungarians 
by an almost solid mass of Rumanians. Despite 
these complications, Bucharest probably cannot sue 
cessfully resist the surrender of most of this rich 
province. The “‘total’’ revision of Rumania’s frontier 
may in turn inspire an attempt by Italy to compel a 
redrawing of its own boundaries at the expense of | 
Jugoslavia and Greece. The permanence of all such 
“settlements” in the Balkans, however, will in the 
last analysis hinge on the outcome of the Battle of | 
Britain. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


JAPAN WEIGHS ITS COURSE 


Formal dissolution on August 15 of the Minseito, 
last of Japan's old-line political parties, removes the 
final barrier to a long-heralded reorganization of 
Japan’s political structure. Yet this action, in keep- 
ing with the times, is more significant for the evolu- 
tion of Japanese foreign policy than for any vital de- 
parture in domestic politics. It looks toward establish- 
ment of a political system more closely patterned on 
the German and Italian model, and thus marks a fur- 
ther step toward rapprochement with the Fascist pow- 
ers of Europe. It cannot add greatly to the regimenta- 
tion already dominant in Japan’s economic and po- 
litical life, or seriously modify the traditional method 
of behind-the-scenes maneuvering through which the 
army, navy, the court circle, the bureaucrats and big 


business reach decisions on issues of basic policy. The | 
political steps thus far taken, moreover, are marked | 
by the same tentativeness which characterizes Japan's 
current foreign policy. The former parties have all | 
voluntarily dissolved but Premier Konoye, dictator | 
elect in the proposed totalitarian system, has not yet | 
organized the new party or formulated the program | 
on which it will be based. It would be safe to assume 
that the vigor with which internal political reorgant 
zation is pressed will depend largely on the progress | 
of Japan’s expansionist efforts and the closeness of | 
the ties which develop with Germany and Italy. | 
CAUTION AT TOKYO. There is no indication 
that Japan intends to move rapidly toward an alliance 
with Hitler, at least so long as the outcome of the 


a 


Nazi a 
month 
well a 
the cal 
Cabine 
French 
willins 
But T 
sure, b 
The kK 
dent” 
the Eu 
vious - 
an out 
posses 
Mussc 
The 
rather 
speed: 
Japan 
ily m« 
rough 
air £0 
fare | 
marg: 
third 
visior 
inatic 
ous O 
FC 
thus 
Japar 
with 
other 
hand 
of ac 
ercise 
has ¢ 
wate 
area, 
the | 
accey 
defe 
ee { 
occu 
date 
hai | 
occu 
auth 
the « 
ingt 
ceed 


Shas 


FORE 
Headc 
Entere 


@ 


—<—<—— 
endence 
MS more 


1. If the 
ly exact 


the cog 
for COn- 
Rumania 
disputes 
ing two 
N agree. 
n of the 
lost this 
likewise 
claim tp 
the ap. 

confer. 
mm is re 
hirds of 
919. Ac. 
1e POpu- 
djoining 
unts to 
-are Rv. 
e ethno- 
a large 
so-called 
- of the 
ngarians 
Despite 
not suc 
his rich 
frontier 
ompel a 
ense of 
all such 
| in the 
sattle of 


V ILDE 


icy. The 
marked 
Japan's 
rave all 
Jictator- 
not yet 
rogram 
assume 
cor gani- 
rogress 
ness of 
aly. 

dication 
alliance 
- of the 


ee 
—_—_ 


Nazi assault on England remains uncertain. After a 
month in office, the Konoye government, despite its 
well advertised extremism, has diverged little from 
the cautious foreign policy of the previous Yonai 
Cabinet. It has pursued the advantages deriving from 
French weakness in Indo-China and from Britain's 
willingness to make concessions in regard to China. 
But Tokyo has won these gains by diplomatic pres- 
sure, backed by the threat rather than the use of force. 
The Konoye Cabinet still maintains the “indepen- 
dent” policy, or the policy of ‘‘non-involvement”’ in 
the European war, which it inherited from the pre- 
yious régime. It has just as carefully refrained from 
an outright military attack on the French and British 
possessions as from an open alliance with Hitler and 
Mussolini. 

The reasons for this caution go deeper than the 
rather obvious desire to see whether England will be 
speedily reduced to submission by the German attack. 
Japan’s military and economic resources are still heav- 
ily mortgaged to the campaign in China, on which 
roughly one million troops and much of the Japanese 
air force is engaged. The strain of three years’ war- 
fare in China has deprived Japan of the economic 
margin necessary to cover a large-scale conflict with a 
third power. Elementary prudence dictates that the 
vision of a “Greater East Asia” under Tokyo’s dom- 
ination be realized without courting the risk of seri- 
ous Opposition. 


FOREIGN COMPLICATIONS. In the moves 
thus far taken to round out its Far Eastern empire, 
Japan has sought above all to avoid an open break 
with the United States. This factor, more than any 
other, has probably led Tokyo to refrain from joining 
hands with Germany and Italy, inviting as that course 
of action may appear in other respects. It may also ex- 
ercise a determining influence on the dispute which 
has arisen over allocation of the strategic Shanghai 
water front, formerly part of the British-patrolled 
area, as an addition to the American defense sector in 
the International Settlement. Japan has refused to 
accept the decision on this issue, taken by the local 
defense commanders over Japanese protest on August 
15, and is insisting that its troops be permitted to 
occupy the entire British defense sector. The exact 
date for withdrawal of the British forces from Shang- 
hai has not been set, but the evacuation will probably 
occur on or about August 24. As the local Shanghai 
authorities have proved unable to effect a settlement, 
the questions at issue have been transferred to Wash- 
ington and Tokyo, where negotiations are now pro- 
ceeding. Pending final adjustment of the dispute, the 
Shanghai Municipal Council has suggested a tem- 


Page Three 


porary compromise, under which the important water 
front area would be occupied by the Settlement’s Vol- 
unteer Corps, a militia unit of foreign nationals con- 
trolled by the Council. The American government has 
indicated its willingness to accept this proposal while 
negotiations for a definitive settlement are taking 
place, but the suggestion has not yet received official 
Japanese approval. 

The partial improvement in Soviet-American diplo- 
matic relations during recent weeks has also led to 
some concern at Tokyo, and thus exerted a restraining 
influence on Japan’s expansionist ambitions. While 
renewal of the Soviet-American trade accord on 
August 5 is the major tangible evidence of improved 
relations, conversations have been taking place at the 
State Department between Sumner Welles, Acting 
Secretary of State, and Constantine A. Oumansky, the 
Soviet Ambassador. Even the opening of an American 
consulate at Vladivostok, which has been suggested 
as one possible outcome of these conversations, would 
create a profound impression in Japan. There is little 
doubt that the Soviet Union would favor the estab- 
lishment of some form of cooperation with the 
United States in the Far East, particularly if it prom- 
ised stronger support for China’s national defense. 
Under present conditions, on the other hand, the 
U.S.S.R. would feel no responsibility for restraining 
Japan’s advance into the south Pacific; it might even 
take advantage of such a development to compose 
the specifically Soviet-Japanese issues which exist in 
connection with trade, fisheries, and the Manchurian 
boundaries. 

In recent months Japan has achieved important 
successes, notably the closing of the Burma Road, the 
withdrawal of British forces from China, and the 
foothold established in French Indo-China. These 
gains, however, have been merely preliminary, and 
are in no sense decisive. It remains to be seen whether 
Tokyo can consolidate its conquests in China, and 
whether it will be given the opportunity to bring the 
South Seas within the limits of its expanding empire. 


T. A. Bisson 


Seasonal Variations in the Economic Activities of Japan, 
by William Alfred Spurr. Lincoln, University of Ne- 
braska, 1940. $1.50 
A scientific analysis of seasonal fluctuations in Jap- 

anese prices, production, employment, stocks of goods, 

transportation, foreign trade, and banking activity since 
the late nineteenth century. 


Iceland: The First American Republic, by Vilhjalmur 
Stefansson. New York, Doubleday, Doran, 1939. $3.00 
At this moment, the explorer’s entertainingly written 

account of present-day conditions and historic background 

is particularly interesting. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 44, AuGust 23, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


EF 181 


1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., 


National 


under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter as ee 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 
AuG. 19.—In the present state of international af- 
fairs, the decision reached by President Roosevelt and 
Prime Minister Mackenzie King of Canada on August 
18 to set up a Permanent Joint Board for Defense 
portends far more than the opening of staff conversa- 
tions relating to the northern half of the Western 
Hemisphere. It is inevitable that the momentous 
agreement with Canada should be read—both here 
and abroad—in relation to the simultaneous negotia- 
tions with Great Britain for acquisition of naval and 
air bases in British possessions in the Western Hem- 
isphere, and the proposed sale or transfer of 50 over- 
age destroyers to aid in the defense of the British 
isles. Taken together, these emergency moves disclose 
the outlines of a new relationship, not with Canada 
alone but with the British Commonwealth, and clear- 
ly reveal the change in our own position which would 
be brought about by a German victory in Europe. 


MUTUAL DEFENSE PACT? The announcement 
of the agreement with Canada, which was issued 
without comment following the meeting of the Pres- 
ident and Mr. King, merely states that the Perma- 
nent Joint Board, to be composed of four or five 
members from each country, “shall commence im- 
mediate studies relating to sea, land and air prob- 
lems . . . and consider in the broad sense the defense 
of the North half of the Western Hemisphere.” Such 
staff conversations, while unprecedented, are a logical 
extension of American policy. Canada has always 
been included within the Monroe Doctrine, at least 
by implication, and the steps now being taken imple- 
ment President Roosevelt's pledge made at Kingston, 
Ontario, two years ago, that the United States ‘will 
not stand idly by” if domination of Canadian soil is 
threatened. 


The implications, however, are far reaching. If our 
strategic position in the Western Hemisphere is 
threatened, as it would be threatened by the destruc- 
tion or surrender of the British fleet, it is logical to 
conclude that the staff conversations would cover such 
problems as defense of all British possessions in the 
Western Hemisphere, the distribution of military, 
naval and air forces for the common defense, and the 
joint development of new naval and air bases. While 
Canada might assume legal responsibility for British 
possessions in this hemisphere, actual responsibility 
for meeting any act of aggression would naturally fall 
upon the United States Navy. An agreement of this 
scope clearly suggests a Mutual Defense Pact, in 


which the obligations and objectives of the two coup. 
tries would be fully set forth, rather than a series of 
staff talks under authority of an executive agreement 
It would raise important political issues, such as the 
relations between the two countries, should Canad, 
continue the war after a British defeat. A formal 
treaty, of course, would require Senate ratification, 
The nature of the political problems involved in 4 
program of hemisphere defense, however, indicate 
that such a treaty with Canada, while marking a de 
parture from our historic aversion to alliances of any 
kind, would be preferable to military conversations 
without a covering treaty. 


NAVAL AND AIR BASES. From the point of 
view of hemisphere defense, the move to acquite 
naval and air bases on this side of the Atlantic is of 
primary strategic importance. Our only Atlantic base 
today—outside of the continental United States— 
are located at Guantanamo, Cuba; San Juan, Puerto 
Rico; and St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands. These 
form an adequate protective screen to cover the pas 
sages into the Caribbean from the North Atlantic; 
but from the South Atlantic, the approaches to the 
Panama Canal are exposed all the way down the line 
of the Lesser Antilles to the coast of South America. 
The absence of American bases in this vital ares 
means that in event of a Nazi victory in Europe, Ger- 
many would not only be within striking distance of 
Brazil, but that a German fleet operating from the 
West Coast of Africa would be 700 miles closer than 
an American fleet operating from Puerto Rico. 

While Bermuda and Jamaica—where Britain main- 
tains secondary naval stations—have been mentioned 
in connection with the negotiations, the Army and 
Navy are more interested in potential bases at Trin 
dad, off the coast of Venezuela, and several islands 
in the Windward and Leeward group, which covet 
the exposed line of the Antilles. In the North, an 
air base in Newfoundland is considered vital to the 
joint defense of Canada. 


One immediate effect of an agreement with Britain 
covering the lease of naval bases and a program of 
joint defense measures with Canada might be to pet: 
mit the release of British and Canadian warships 
now operating in this hemisphere. Such a distribution 
of naval forces would encounter little opposition in 
Congress, where there is still much resistance to the 
outright sale of American destroyers, or their release 


as part of the deal on naval bases. 
W. T. STONE 


An inte 


— 
Vou. X] 
— 


The Assi 
will find 


and peri 


: Gr 


Economi 


A°. 
it 
chapte 
the Ur 
the co 
and F 
York, 
the bre 
Weste 
power 
meetir 
Roose 
tity in 
to go 
Britist 
DII 
count! 
and i 
over t 
ers, di 
triang 
the Jc 
ous g 
tem.* 
and e 
can f 
sprea 
Since 
the n 
Unite 
prote 
medic 
and 
jeopa 
natio: 


*Cf. W 


