




















| IGN POLICY BULLETIN = | 
RE | 
FO ’ ; , Entered as second- 
—=| An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff class matter December 
ide. Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Beg cor ee | 
hau- N. ¥., under the act 
the FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated PER of March 3, 1879. 
j 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. GBNEK .. 
no Tay. CAP Bpieks 
ends — T | 
, Vou. XVI. No. 52 OCTOBER 22, 1937 
tion, | —— 
Otla- PUERTO RICO AT THE CROSSROADS General Library | 
xtent by Earle K. James 
Tews What is to be the future of Puerto Rico—independence, University 0 f Michigan . 
that statehood, “a form of autonomy, or continuance of the 
intel status quo? This report analyzes the Island’s internal prob- . . 
— lems as well as those arising from Puerto Rico’s relations Ann Arbor, Mich. 
Ss of with the United States, and declares that a decision regard- 
d by ing political status is essential for the peace and constructive 
> the economic development of the Island. | 
, ex: October 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 
o be | == 














art, BRITAIN BALANCES ON 


nglo- 


EUROPEAN TIGHTROPE 





i . ny once more to Italy on what was 
Ne, described as “a point of procedure,” Britain and 


air raids on Barcelona and Valencia, may attempt to 


sabl seize Minorca, held by Loyalist troops, thus increasing 
far | France agreed to submit the question of foreign the threat to French communications with North 
anish volunteers in Spain to a subcommittee of the “par- = Africa. A French suggestion that France and Britain 


dj alyzed” non-intervention committee, which met in 
“™ London on October 16. True to its reputation for 
lack procrastination, the subcommittee was immediately 
th faced with a deadlock over two conflicting plans 
‘hid presented by M. Corbin, French Ambassador to Lon- 

oy. 40M and his Italian colleague, Count Grandi. Both 
6 the Plans contemplate the grant of at least limited 
belligerent rights to General Franco and an improved 


, foul Italian inhabitants might prove a serious source of © 
non sYstem of control on lines recommended in September disaffection in case of war. France also suspects that 
Ir jg PY Admiral van Dulm, chief of the non-intervention Mussolini, who following in the Kaiser's footsteps 


y the 22Vva! patrol, and Mr. Hemming, secretary of the 
© the 20m-intervention control board. They differ sharply, 
however, on the fundamental issue. The French 
plan calls for proportional withdrawal of volun- 
teers from both sides, while the Italian plan, backed 
by Germany, proposes “‘a partial withdrawal of a cer- 
tain number of volunteers in equal quantity.” The 
Italian plan, based on a British proposal of July 14 
crisll for “substantial” withdrawal, would mean that, 
ool for example, if it is agreed to withdraw 10,000 
p but men from both sides, practically the entire Interna- 
vesteq| UOnal Brigade composed of volunteers from many 
anless| UNtties fighting with the Loyalists would have to 
chal leave, while Italy, whose organized troops are esti- 
mated at between 40,000 and 80,000, would still 
tetain a large force on Spanish soil. This proposal, 
which is obviously to the disadvantage of Valencia, 
Robert | offers ample opportunity for time-consuming con- 
troversy, and gives Italy additional leisure to con- 
Solidate its hold on Spain and the Balearic Islands. 


It is Italy’s strategic threat to the Balearics which 
Nation} HOW preoccupies Paris and, to a much lesser degree, 
ss matt!) London. France fears that the Italians, established 
on the island of Majorca which serves as a base for 


e and 
n de- 
ating 
1s ex: 

burn 
1 con- 


3AN 


s from 











forestall an Italian coup by occupying Minorca met 
with no encouragement from the British, who hesitate 
to give even the appearance of sharing in the spoils of 
the Spanish war. The French, moreover, are alarmed 
by Italian activities in Africa. The large-scale re- 
enforcements sent to Libya are regarded as a menace 
to the French protectorate of Tunis, whose 90,000 


has proclaimed himself protector of Islam, has his 
eye on Spanish Morocco, and that native unrest in 
Tunis and French Morocco is due, in part at least, 
to Italian propaganda, which has not been without 
effect in Palestine and Syria. 

Yet Mussolini, outwardly more determined than 
ever to assure Franco’s victory, also has his troubles. 
All has not been sweetness and light between Italy 
and the Spanish Rebels, who have resented the os- 
tentation with which Italian generals have claimed 
credit for the victories of Bilbao and Santander. 
On October 14 it was announced in Rome that Gen- 
eral Bastico, commander in chief of Italian forces in 
Spain, and General Terruzi, chief inspector of the 
Blackshirt legions, had been permanently recalled. 
It is also reported that the Generals had urged Mus- 
solini to send Franco not only additional troops, but 
new war material, which Italy, running behind 
schedule on its own armament program owing to 
shortage of raw materials, may find it difficult to 
supply. 

The British government apparently believes that 
time—as well as money and natural resources—is on 
the side of the democracies, provided no one acci- 











re ee 2 


bat 

“ih 
i 
j 
t 








dentally upsets the European applecart. In a speech 
to the Manchester Chamber of Commerce on Octo- 
ber 14 Prime Minister Chamberlain somewhat wist- 
fully recalled the “good old days when Britain was 
an impregnable island” and, disclaiming any “‘sin- 
ister designs,” assured the world that the mainspring 
of British foreign policy is a desire to maintain 
peace. A more militant note was struck by Mr. Eden, 
who told a Conservative party rally at Llandudno 
on October 15 that “‘a clear distinction must be made 
between non-intervention in what is purely a Span- 
ish affair and non-intervention where British in- 
terests are at stake.” 


Mr. Chamberlain’s desire for peace at any price 
dove--i! neatly into Hitler’s carefully laid plans 
for dividing Europe into two parts—the West, where 
Britain and France are for the present to be left 
undisturbed, and the East, where Germany is to 
achieve its manifest destiny. A further step in the 
Fiihrer’s successive moves to isolate France was taken 
on October 13, when Germany, in a note to the 
Belgian government, promised to respect at all 
times and under all circumstances the inviolability 
and territorial integrity of Belgium, unless Belgium 
participates in military action against Germany. The 
German note, intended as a companion piece to the 
Anglo-French note of April 24 which guaranteed 
Belgium’s neutrality pending the conclusion of a 
new Locarno, differs from that note in one essential 
respect: it makes no reference to Belgium’s obli- 
gations under the League Covenant. By this arrange- 
ment Germany apparently hopes to prevent France 
from using Belgian territory to invade Germany in 
case the latter attacks Czechoslovakia—now violently 
denounced by the German press; while Belgium in- 
tends to avoid the necessity of applying military 
sanctions against Germany. But if Germany, having 
attacked France or any other League power, is de- 
clazed to be the aggressor, Belgium under the League 
Covenant is still obligated to permit the passage of 


French and British troops carrying out League mili- 


tary sanctions. ‘The German pledge to Belgium is 
also intended to reassure Britain, whose chief con- 
cern in Europe is the inviolability of the Low Coun- 
tries. 

The only fly in the German ointment offered to 
Britain is Hitler’s determined campaign to recover 
the colonies lost by Germany in 1919. While many 
Britishers would not object if the Reich extended its 
sway in Eastern Europe, few are found who favor 
the return of German colonies now held as League 
mandates by Britain and its Dominions. It is 
an old Anglo-Saxon custom—never clearly under- 
stood by continental Europeans who, if more cynical, 
are less given to circumlocution—to throw the cloak 
of moral concepts over needs and desires which 
other peoples regard as natural, if not always com- 


Page Two —_ 








em 


mendable. Now that Germany and Italy are daily 
puncturing these moral concepts by fresh demands, 
Britain is faced with the awkward problem of recon. 
ciling its avowed desire to defend democracy with 
its evident determination to avoid any sacrifice 
which might either check or assuage the dictatorships, 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


PALESTINE ARABS REBEL AGAINST BRITAIN 

The uneasy calm which had existed in Palestine 
since the publication of the Palestine Royal Com. | 
mission Report on July 7 was ended by a new wave 
of terrorism inaugurated on October 14. Violence 
and murder during the next few days constituted 
the Arab response to drastic measures taken by the 


Palestine government after the slaying of Lewis Y, | 


Andrews, District Commissioner of Galilee, on Se 
tember 26. The British authorities, who had been 
severely criticized in the past for condoning Arab 
violence, deported four leading members of the 
Arab Higher Committee on October 1 and impris- 
oned hundreds of alleged agitators shortly there. 
after. Five other members of the Committee fled 
from the country and were barred from return- 
ing. Haj Amin el Husseini, the Mufti of Jerusalem, 
who had gathered into his hands absolute political 
and religious control over the Arabs of Palestine, 
was deposed from his offices and deprived of control 
of an income from religious funds totaling $335,000 
annually. Escaping to Syria he joined other exiled 
Arab leaders, who will doubtless recruit guerrilla 
bands in Syria and Iraq to raid across the Palestine 
border, and will probably long continue to be a 
thorn in the side of the government. 

The current disturbances—little less than an Arab 
insurrection—spring from the Arab nationalists’ in- 
transigent opposition to partition or any other solv- 
tion of the Palestine problem which does not give 
them political control over the whole of what they 
regard as their own territory. The Arabs have 
looked on anxiously while the British government, 
instead of promptly implementing the Royal Com- 
mission proposals, prepared to forge, over the 
next few years, a detailed scheme elaborated 
with more deference to the wishes of the parties 





involved. The deliberative bodies concerned—the 
British Parliament, the Council of the Jewish, 
Agency, and the League of Nations Council—have 
been unenthusiastic in their reception of the patti 
tion plan. They have not, however, been able to| 
suggest a carefully worked out, concrete proposal 
offering an easier road to peace—impossible t 
achieve unless the intensity of Jewish and Arab na} 
tionalism is modified—and have therefore been com 
strained to reserve judgment on partition. As the 
matter now stands, the British government is pre 
paring to send a new commission to Palestine fo! 
(Continued on Page 4) 








nds, 


-cOn- 


alem, 
litical 
stine, 
ontrol 
5,000 
exiled 
rrilla 
estine 

be a 


Arab 
ts’ in- 
- solu- 
t give 
t they 

have 
iment, ; 

Com- 
rc the 
orated 
parties 
1—the 
Jewish , 
—have | 
parti 
ble to 
oposa 
sle to 
ab na 
COM 
As the 
is pre 
ne ya 





W ashington News Letter 














[a 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Ocr. 18—In accepting the invitation of the Belgian 
government to confer with other signatories of the 
Nine-Power Treaty at Brussels, the State Depart- 
ment has confirmed the impression that Washington 
does not intend to take the driver’s seat in the effort 
to organize “concerted action” to quarantine war in 


‘the Far East. Secretary Hull’s note of October 16, 


accepting the invitation and appointing Mr. Norman 
Davis as the delegate of the United States, states 
as clearly as the language of diplomacy permits that 
the “next step” in the Administration’s new program 
of international cooperation will be directed toward 


| mediation of the conflict rather than coercion of the 


aggressor. Mr. Roosevelt significantly underscored 
this purpose in his fireside talk on October 12, when 
he sought to assure the country that what he really 
meant at Chicago was a program “‘to seek by agree- 
ment a solution of the present situation in China,” 
and “in efforts to find that solution it is our purpose 
to cooperate with the other signatories to this [ Nine 
Power} treaty, including China and Japan.” 

Mr. Hull is not saying what proposals the Ameri- 
can delegation will carry to Brussels, or what action 
will be taken if the peaceful procedure of mediation 
breaks down. It is quite evident, however, that the 
State Department wishes to retain its independence 
of judgment, and to avoid being bound in advance 
by any decisions that are taken. 


Arms exports reach new high. The Munitions 
Control Board’s report of licenses for arms ex- 
ports issued during September showed the highest 
figure for any month since the beginning of muni- 
tions control two years ago. The Soviet Union led, 
with licenses to export over $10,000,000 worth of 
war materials, of which the largest share consisted 
of parts for a “pre-fabricated” battleship. Informed 
quarters here understand that the Russians have been 
trying for some time to buy battleship parts in this 
country but have made little progress so far. Ap- 
parently the shipbuilding companies demanded that 
the agents of the Soviet government secure licenses 
for the export before specifications for the battleship 
were made or contracts drawn up. Since construc- 
tion of a battleship usually requires from two to 
three years at least, it will probably be a long time 
before the first pre-fabricated battleship gets afloat 
even if the shipbuilders and the Soviet government 
come to terms. 

Apart from the Soviet licenses, high purchases by 


other countries marked the rising tide of “rearma- 
ment,” especially since the outbreak of the fighting 
in the Far East. China, which has been the United 
States’ largest buyer since the beginning of control, 
came next on the list with licenses for the export of 
over $2,800,000 worth of munitions. Japan took 
licenses for arms costing about $440,000. Another 
straw in the wind is the announcement by the De- 
partment of Commerce that the exportatign f.aero- 
nautic products from the United States attained a 
record monthly aggregate of $5,158,818 during Au- 
gust, which was about 85 per cent higher than that 
of July and almost 125 per cent higher than that of 
the corresponding period of last year; and that for 
the first eight months of this year, exports of these 
products were approximately 75 per cent greater 
than during the same period of 1936. 


Good Neighbor policy toward Mexico to con- 
tinue. State Department officials, harassed simul- 
taneously by crises in Europe and the Far East, derive 
considerable solace from the tranquil tone of the 
Western Hemisphere. But recent dispatches from 
Mexico have raised questions concerning the future 
of inter-American harmony. A meeting of United 
States consular representatives just concluded at 
Mexico City has been pictured as forecasting a shift 
in Washington’s policy. American interests have 
had their toes stepped on by various decrees of the 
Cardenas socialization program. The trend toward 
nationalization of the oil industry has alarmed 
petroleum companies. The movement for agrarian 
reform has involved confiscation of farms and 
ranches held by American and British, as well as 
Mexican proprietors. 


Ambassador Daniels, in an interview issued last 
month, commented on the petroleum situation, and 
expressed hope for maintenance of the 1928 
Morrow-Calles agreement safeguarding foreign oil 
rights. It is also believed that the Ambassador is 
keeping a weather eye on the terms of settle- 
ment which the government may soon concede to 
the strike demands of the oil unions, following in- 
vestigation of the petroleum industry by an official 
commission. On the agrarian question, the State 
Department has apparently not been ve tang to 
press its demands too strongly. The Cardenas ad- 
ministration has promised compensation for lands 
seized from American citizens, but no payments have 
yet been made. Consuls at the recent conference 
were requested to come armed with reports on the 





—— 








= Page Four 


extent of American investments in their respective 
areas, and the degree to which these had been af- 
fected by government policies. Such data would 
equip the Department for a “stronger” policy, 
should that be ultimately decided on. 

Washington officials, however, decry what they 
term the sensational ‘‘over-playing’” of these events 
by certain correspondents. As to settlement of 
the oil strike, it is indicated that final terms must 
take into account three parties—the government, as 
well as capital and labor. The demands of the 
agrarian program for rural credits are keeping the 
Cardenas administration poor, and the public treasury 
vitally needs the revenues paid by the oil companies. 
The government, in its own self-interest, is not 
expected to permit labor’s demands to kill this goose 
with the golden eggs. 

The Good Neighbor policy, it is pointed out, is 
necessarily reciprocal in character, including as an 
essential phase fair treatment of the United States 
and its citizens by Latin America. In accord with 
this emphasis, some slight modification of policy 
toward Mexico may be envisaged. But it is strongly 
denied that any fundamental departure from the 
Good Neighbor policy is contemplated, or that pos- 
sible change in the silver purchase program of the 
United States will be used as a club against Mexico. 
Washington has no desire to risk a squall in inter- 








American waters while war clouds darken both thel 
European and the Far Eastern horizons. 





PALESTINE ARABS REBEL AGAINST BRITAIN 
(Continued from Page 2) 
negotiations with Jews and Arabs to determine ten 
tative boundaries, and make financial and other ap. 
rangements. Detailed recommendations will then be 
submitted to Parliament, the Jews and the League 
for their approval. 

It remains to be seen whether the British are 
willing or able to quell all violence, by enforci 
martial law if necessary; and to induce other Arab 
leaders to brave the wrath of fanatical terrorists 
and cooperate with the government. Britain will 
doubtless make every possible effort to secure Arab 
assent to a new régime. A rebellious Palestine, be 
cause of its strategic value, is a pawn in the conflict 
between Britain and Italy in the Mediterranean, 
Already it is rumored that Mussolini is supporting 
the Mufti’s activities; and British authorities have 
countered this move by an indirect threat to annex 
the territory as a British crown colony. Under these 
circumstances the British may find it wiser to seek 
Jewish-Arab rapprochement in a single country than 
to push on with a project which might oblige them 
to defend a small Jewish state from the Arab world. 

Davip H. PoppPEr 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Franco Means Business, by Georges Rotvand. New York, 
Devin-Adair, 1937. $1.25 


A brief biographical sketch by an ardent admirer of 
Spain’s Rebel leader. 


An Economic History of the British Isles, by Arthur 
Birnie. New York, Crofts, 1936. $4.00 


A rather unimaginative treatment of an important 
subject. 


British Propaganda at Home and in the United States 
from 1914 to 1917, by James Duane Squires. Cam- 
bridge, Harvard University Press, 1936. $1.00 
The importance of the mechanism of mass persuasion 

is presented in scholarly fashion. 


The Colonial Problem. A Report by a Study Group of 
members of the Royal Institute of International Af- 
fairs. New York, Oxford University Press, 1937. $8.50 
A comprehensive survey by a rather conservative group. 

Vital Peace, by Henry Wickham Steed. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1936. $2.75 
This thoughtful book pleads for a more “heroic” concep- 

tion of peace. 


Social Security, by Maxwell S. Stewart. New York, Nor- 
ton, 1937. $3.00 


A lucid analysis of our social security program and its 
shortcomings. 





International Trade in Certain Raw Materials and Food-| 
stuffs by Countries of Origin and Consumption 1985, 
Geneva, League of Nations, 1936. $1.00 

Balances of Payments 1935. Geneva, League of Nations, 
1936. $1.50 

International Trade Statistics 1935. Geneva, League @ i 
Nations, 1936. $2.50 ; 
These statistical compilations, obtainable from the Co’ 

lumbia University Press, throw a revealing light upon) 

the volume and character of international business trans) 
actions and should be particularly valuable at a time) 
when the revival of international trade and equal com) 
mercial access to raw materials are being seriously dis- 
cussed. 

A New Social Philosophy, by Werner Sombart. Prinece-) 
ton, N. J. Princeton University Press, 1937. $3.50 
A rather romantic plea for a “stationary” economy. 


Canada, by André Siegfried. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 
1937. $3.00 
This entertaining survey of Canada’s national prob 
lems stresses the strength of the country’s ties with they 
United States. 


Palestine at the Crossroads, by Ladislas Farago. New 
York, Putnam’s, 1937. $3.50 : 
Well-written account of an observant journalist’s abe 

tempt to appraise the achievements of the different parties) . 

in the Palestine impasse. 





— 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 52, Ocrospzr 22, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National) 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasiig BUELL, President; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editer. Entered as second-class m 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





e of 


e Co 
upon 
rans- 

time 
com- 

, dis- 


rince- 
50 
ay. 
Brace, 


prob 
th the 


New 


t’s at- 
yarties 





