






LeL\AN | 


IC 


‘5 


t in 
this 
used 
now 
L942 
This 
give 


His | 


long 
that 


that 
t the 

year 
vated 

fleet 
Navy 
f the 
- Situ- 
yhose 
ctics, 
ttack 


ping 
eople 
ic” is 

war. 
losses 
st for 


have 
- War- 
mn for 
ervice 
cts to 
istruc- 
- suit- 
o add 
atrols, 
ttacks 
yards. 
rioned 
Jnited 
ifteen 
it raid 
be ac- 


OTT 


Ss 

















General Library 


PERIUUICAL 
QRNERAL — 
UNIV. oF Mlén. 


Univer 


Ann Arhor 


APR 27 1943 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


+ 


-itw pf . " 
sity Ua Michigan 


Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vor. XXII, No. 27 


Apri 23, 1948 





ARCHITECTS OF WORLD ORDER DIFFER ON GROUND PLANS 


hie the approach of three United Nations 
conferences—on food, on monetary problems, 


| and on relief and rehabilitation—all to be held in 


this country during the coming months, two ques- 
tions have begun to perplex the American public. 
First, is the task of international collaboration most 
effectively approached through a series of conferences 
on various technical questions, or should it be pre- 
ceded by the establishment of a world organization ? 
And, second, should the architects of a world society 
begin their blueprints with the ground floor, by form- 
ing regional federations, or start with the rooftop, 
by forming a world association of nations? 

WILL THE PARTS FORM A WHOLE? Those 
who advocate the immediate formation of a United 
Nations political council which would serve as a 
nucleus of the world organization of the future— 
among them, notably, Wendell L. Willkie and: Gov- 
ernor Stassen of Minnesota, as well as members of 
the Commission for the Organization of Peace—be- 
lieve that the way to start a world organization is to 


| Start it, and that the best time for such a move is right 


now, when peoples everywhere may prove more 
malleable than they are apt to be once the pressure 
of war has been relaxed. They also contend that a 
series of technical conferences, no matter how suc- 
cessful, will not coalesce into a world organization, 


| and that the world will thus be left just where it 


was in 1939, when the League of Nations, with many 
achievements in technical fields to its credit, had 
failed to become a fulcrum for the political, military 
and economic power of its member states. These 
arguments carry a great deal of conviction, and there 
is real danger that successive conferences may go off 
at tangents unless they can be firmly geared into the 
framework of an international organization function- 
ing on the basis of a more or less coherent policy. 

On the other hand, it can be argued with equal 
force that, in this period of great flux, it may be im- 


pfactical to set up a rigid framework which might 
fail to make sufficient allowance for the diverse needs 
and problems of widely varying areas of the globe. 
The creators of the League of Nations started by 
establishing an organization which had no roots in 
the experience of mankind, and left human beings 
to gain this experience, haltingly and painfully, with- 
in the institutions set up at Geneva. The method now 
apparently favored by President Roosevelt and Mr. 
Churchill is to use the practice of international col- 
laboration acquired both by the League and by the 
United Nations during this war as building material 
for a future world order. This does not mean 
that an international organization is not the ultimate 
goal of the President and Mr. Churchill. Where they 
differ from those who advocate immediate formation 
of a world association of nations is that they take that 
objective as their point of arrival, whereas their critics 
take it as their point of departure. On this subject 
there can, and will continue to be, legitimate differ- 
ence of opinion, since the divergent views expressed 
are affected not so much by historical precedents— 
which can be cited in favor of either course—but by 
each individual’s judgment concerning the most prac- 
tical way of developing political institutions. 


Regardless of the procedure adopted, the question 
still remains whether it is better to concentrate atten- 
tion on the formation of regional federations to be 
subsequently linked into a world organization, or 
whether the creation of a world society should pre- 
cede regional groupings. In his broadcast of March 
21 Churchill indicated that he favored the formation 
of a Council of Europe and a Council of Asia as 
segments of a world body. In practice, the responsibil- 
ities of the United States cannot be limited to the 
Western Hemisphere since, as Under Secretary of 
State Sumner Welles said at a meeting of the New 
York Rotary Club on April 15, the New World can 
never attain complete security and well-being “except 





TP cen ie a A ee ee eae ees Sat 
= 2 ae 


< eS — oe a 
a rapa as ee Na Si Fie 2 OK 


et 














in collaboration with the other states and regions of 
the world.” Neither the world nor the regional ap- 
proach excludes the other. The two should be com- 
plementary, just as local and state responsibilities in 
this country do not exclude—on the contrary they 
often serve to promote—a sense of responsibility for 
the nation as a whole. 

COMMON INTERESTS THE REAL TEST. 
From a realistic point of view, it must be admitted 
that the four great powers among the United Nations 
—Britain, Russia, China and the United States—will 
emerge from the war with a major share of the 
world’s military force in their control. If they can 
work together, and can succeed in enlisting on their 
side in the post-war period the small nations, includ- 
ing those which either lack military force altogether 
or have been shorn of it by the Axis countries, their 
cooperation could become the foundation-stone of 
world organization. Under unfavorable circum- 
stances, their war coalition could, in time of peace, 
disintegrate into an intercontinental balance of power 
whose instability would hold a new threat of war. But 
machinery alone, no matter how elaborately blue- 
printed on paper, will not suffice to hold the United 
Nations together if they meanwhile develop diver- 
gent interests. President Roosevelt apparently believes 
that common interests can be most effectively devel- 
oped now through conferences dealing with problems 


BERMUDA CONFERENCE HOLDS 


The Anglo-American refugee conference opened 
in Hamilton, Bermuda, on April 19, to the accom- 
paniment of pessimistic predictions in the United 
States. Some of the newspapers’ lack of enthusiasm 
for the conference, which is expected to last from ten 
days to three weeks, may have been due to chagrin at 
being excluded from the meetings and restricted to 
prepared news releases. But interested organizations 
also believe that the delegates will accomplish little 
and Richard K. Law, head of the British delegation, 
warned against “false or premature hopes.” Instead 
of studying the broad problems of what should be 
done to help the hundreds of thousands of victims 
of Nazi persecution in occupied Europe, the confer- 
ence is concerning itself only with aiding some of 
those who have escaped to neutral countries. If any 





JUST PUBLISHED —a timely analysis of the 
United Nations’ position in the Pacific area. READ: 


Strategy of the War in Asia 
by Lawrence K. Rosinger 


25c 


April 15 issue of ForeiGN Poticy REPoRTS 
Reports ate issued on the ist and 15th of each month. 





Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 














Page Two — 





ed 


which are a matter of life and death for all of the 
United Nations—such as food and relief. In fact, if 
the United Nations should find it impossible to ¢o- 
operate on these problems, little can be expected of 
world organization. 

To start with modest expectations is at least to 
avoid the danger that peoples everywhere might be 
disillusioned by the failure of grandiose undertak- 
ings. But modest beginnings, like a seed, should hold | 
within them the elements of future growth. The 
criticism that can be made of President Roosevelt's 
views—if they are correctly presented by Forrest 
Davis in the Saturday Evening Post—is not that they 
are modest. This might be regarded as a mark of 
statesmanship. Their weakness is that they seem to } 
skirt the major problems that will have to be faced 
in any kind of organization—regional or universal, 
general or particular—which the United Nations may 
decide to form, such as limitations on national! soy- 
ereignty, the need for establishing some form of in- 
ternational control over the world’s armed forces if | 
they are to be used to “quarantine” the aggressor, and 
so on. Desirable as it unquestionably is to present 
international organization to the American public in 
the most attractive possible light, the question re- 
mains whether the easiest way out is necessarily, over 
the long haul, the most constructive. | 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


OUT LITTLE HOPE FOR REFUGEES 


attention is given to the larger subject it will be as, 
Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden told the House of 
Commons on April 7, purely “exploratory.” 


PUBLIC OPINION DEMANDED ACTION. 
The calling of the conference is clearly the result of 
vigorous demands that have recently been made by 
Jewish and Christian groups in England and the 
United States. In response to this public pressure, 
Ambassador Halifax and Secretary of State Hull 
agreed to have their governments study the plight of 
the refugees, but suggested that accommodations for 
them should be found as near as possible to their 
present location and that they should be supported 
in neutral countries in so far as transportation facil- 
ities makes this possible. 

The major question under discussion at Bermuda | 
is the very narrow one of what can be done now for 
the 20,000 refugees—mostly French—in Spain and 
Portugal and the 12,000 who are in Switzerland. For 
these three neutral countries the refugees constitute a 
serious problem in international law because most of 
them lack passports. More important, however, is the 
pressure these uninvited immigrants exert on al- 
ready overtaxed food supplies. The United States 
and Britain have recognized the inability of Spain, 
impoverished by civil war, to care for the heavy 
migration that occurred over the Pyrenees after the 





REFS! & 


rN’ 








ee 


the 
, if 
CO- 
| of 


to 
be 
tak. 
old 
The 
elt's 
rest 
hey 
: of 
1 to 
uced 
rsal, 
may 
SOV- 
; in- 
as if 
and 
sent 
ic in 
. £e- 
over 


.N 


e as, 
e of 


ON. 
It of 
le by 
| the 
sure, 
Hull 
ht of 
s for 
their 
orted 
facil- 


muda 
w for 
1 and 
1. For 
tute a 
ost of 
is the 
mn al- 
States 
Spain, 
heavy 
er the 














— Page Three —— 


Germans occupied all of France last November, and 
their Ambassadors have been giving money and sup- 
lies to thousands of needy refugees. More recently, 
General Giraud has joined their efforts by shipping 
food to Spain from North African ports and by help- 
ing some refugees to enter French Morocco and 
Algeria. These piecemeal efforts have not been 
enough, however, and ways must now be found of 


' supporting these refugees for the duration of the war. 


In addition to those in Spain, Portugal and Switz- 
efland, the problem of the 30,000 Bulgarian Jews 
whom King Boris’ government is reported willing to 
release may be studied with a view to finding them 
atemporary settlement while awaiting transportation 
to Palestine. 


IDEALS vs. PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 
In Bermuda a conflict is being waged between 
“ideals” and “practical considerations.” The British 
and Americans recognize the obligation to aid those 


| who are fighting the common enemy; but many ob- 


stacles undeniably block the path leading to fulfill- 
ment of that obligation. Chief among these difficul- 
ties is the acute shipping shortage. The submarine 
warfare and the needs of the Allied fronts hinder 
both the supplying of refugees in neutral countries 
and their removal to places where they would be more 
easily cared for. Assuming, however, that shipping 
could be found, there is the very real possibility that 
Hitler will not permit Jews and other persecuted per- 
sons to leave German-controlled territory. The United 
States recently received an indication that Hitler is 
determined to carry out his policy of annihilating the 








Jewish race in Europe when the Nazi-controlled - 
régime at Vichy rescinded permission in November , 
1942 for 5,000 children to leave France, even though . 
preliminary preparations had been made for sending 
them to the United States. 

Even if the first two difficulties are overcome, the 
problem of finding places of settlement remains seri- 
ous because of rigid legislative and administrative 
regulations on immigration now prevailing in most 
countries. Owing to the scarcity of food, it may 
prove impracticable for the United Kingdom to re- 
ceive additional refugees, but some British territories 
could accept many more, especially Africa—21,000 
Poles, for example, fled via Russia and Iran to 
British East Africa in 1942. Also, if the United States 
annual immigration quota of 153,774 were filled, 
thousands more could be admitted to this country. 
During the war years 1939-42 the State Department 
issued only 228,964 of the 461,322 visas allowed by 
law. Although many persons undoubtedly were grant- 
ed visas who then found it impossible to reach the 
United States, severe administrative restrictions were 
chiefly responsible for the gaps between the possible 
and the actual. The Latin American countries and 
Canada also have stringent regulations on immigra- 
tion that might conceivably be modified in view of 
the fact that many of these nations could find room 
for thousands of Europe’s refugees. But whatever 
temporary measures are devised at Bermuda, it is 
clear that only a United Nations victory can make a 
permanent solution possible. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The Politics of This War, by Ray F. Harvey and others. 
New York, Harper, 1943. $2.50 
Twelve journalists shrewdly analyze the influence on 
US. war effort of important pressure groups—farmers, 
big and small business, labor, and the armed services. 


Covering the Mexican .Front, by Betty Kirk. Norman, 
Oklahoma University Press, 1942. $3.00 

A vigorous book on Mexico’s political front by an Amer- 
kan newspaperwoman. Full of dynamite, sometimes un- 
fair, but never dull. 


Strategy at Singapore, by Eugene H. Miller. New York, 
Macmillan, 1942. $2.50 
Brief study of the background of the Singapore naval 
base, especially the reasons for building it and the nature 
of the debate in England before and during its construction. 


The War: Third Year, by Edgar McInnis. New York, Ox- 
ford University Press, 1942. $2.00 
An addition to a valuable series which covers the essen- 


tial bare bones of chronology with interestingly presented 
text. 


London Calling, edited by Storm Jameson. New York, Har- 
per, 1942. $2.50 
The compilation, a sort of “thank offering” to America 
by noted English authors, will delight even those with a 
distaste for anthologies. 


The Guilt of the German Army, by Hans Ernest Fried. 
New York, Macmillan, 1942. $3.50 


The militarist roots of National Socialism are traced 
by an Austrian scholar, who points out that the military 
caste circumvented Allied attempts to disarm Germany 
after World War I, and cleared the way for Hitler’s rise 
to power. The author advocates the uprooting of the Ger- 
man High Command after the war, and the creation of 
a democratically officered “people’s army.” 


Postwar Economic Problems, by Seymour E. Harris, edi- 

tor. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1943. $3.50 

Twenty-three well-known economists discuss the national 
debt, full employment, social security, agriculture, price 
control and international trade after the war. Their thesis 
is that an orderly program of demobilization can prevent 
the U.S. from taking economic defeat after the military 
victory is won. 





POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 27, Apri: 23, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lug, Secretary; Vera MicuHE.es Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


eae month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
BS s Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 











Washington News L. etter 





stthan, 








APRIL 19.—World War I strategists were divided 
between partisans of the Western Front who thought 
the Allies should concentrate on beating the Ger- 
mans in France, and the Eastern Front school who 
held that the road to victory lay through the Balkans. 
In the current global conflict a somewhat analagous 
division of opinion has developed between those who 
think we should devote our major efforts to defeat- 
ing Germany first, and the military experts who argue 
that if we do not soon tackle the job of conquering 
the Japanese, it will be too late. Rightly or wrongly, 
President Roosevelt and Winston Churchill have 
opted for the first policy. The decision to give priority 
to the European war was taken during the meeting 
of the two statesmen in Washington in December 
1941, and reaffirmed at Casablanca last January. 

THE JAPANESE MENACE. From the beginning, 
many military and political leaders in United Nations 
councils have questioned the wisdom of this course. 
It was only to be expected that numerous U.S. Navy 
officers would be chagrined at the failure to go for 
the Japanese first. So were the Australians, to whom 
the “yellow peril” is more imminent than it is to the 
people of the United States. The “Pacific War’’ school 
has argued that if the Tokyo government is permitted 
to exploit the rich supplies of raw materials it con- 
quered in 1942, the task of vanquishing Japan will 
be terribly long and costly, if not impossible. 

The past week has witnessed the most formidable 
challenge yet given to the Roosevelt-Churchill stra- 
tegy. A well-orchestrated campaign by high Amer- 
ican and Australian officials demanded that more men 
and matériel be immediately sent to the southwest 
Pacific to halt what they said was an imminent Jap- 
anese invasion threat. Something in the nature of a 
public debate was staged between General Douglas 
MacArthur and Secretary of the Navy Knox, both 
as to the seriousness of this menace and the preemi- 
nence of air power over sea power. At the same time 
Dr. Herbert V. Evatt, Australian Minister for Ex- 
ternal Affairs now on a mission to this country, 
warned that it would be “suicidal” to give Japan time 
to consolidate its gains. General Blamey, commander 
of Allied ground forces in the southwest Pacific, de- 
clared that the Japanese have massed 200,000 men 
to the north of Australia. Four heavy Japanese air 
attacks within a week on Port Moresby and Oro 
Bay seemed to give point to the cry of distress from 
Premier Curtin of Australia that these raids were only 
a prelude to fresh Japanese assaults. 

WASHINGTON IS NOT ALARMED. But 


FOR VICTORY * 


BUY UNITED 





Washington has refused to become jittery. Secretary 
of War Stimson, while promising an “increasing flow 
of planes” to Australia, pointed out that similar 


urgent pleas for reinforcements are constantly and > 


with equal reason coming from other theatres of 
war. And when Senator Chandler asserted in the 
Senate that China cannot last another year without 
more air power and that the Japanese in the Aleu- 
tians are a growing menace to the American West 


Coast, Senator Barkley, Majority leader, quietly re. | 


joined that the war was not to be won by strategy 
developed in the halls of Congress. Mr. Stimson was 
too diplomatic to point out that some of the other 
battle zones do not have commanders with the pres- 
tige of a MacArthur to press their claims, or Prime 
Ministers and Ambassadors to indorse their pleas. 
It may be only a coincidence, but Washington has 
noted that the appeals for reinforcements for Aus- 
tralia follow the return to that country of General 
George C. Kenney, commander of Allied air forces 
in the southwest Pacific, who was told when he came 
here last month to make this plea that the war against 
Germany had first priority. Such a decision was 
bound to disappoint a prominent military leader 
like General MacArthur, who a year ago left Baatan 
for Australia in the expectation that he would head 
an expeditionary force for immediate reconquest of 
the Philippines and has since been obliged to remain 
largely on the defensive for lack of men and material. 
A Japanese invasion of Australia this year is con- 
sidered in Washington as being a possibility, but not 
a probability. It is known that the Japanese have 
been constructing a tremendous number of new ait- 
fields in the long string of islands reaching from 
Japan across the East Indies toward Australia. But 
it is thought here that the Japanese ring of air bases 
in the southwest Pacific is primarily defensive, being 
designed to protect their key base of Rabaul in New 
Britain. These Japanese preparations do not unduly 
perturb military authorities here, for when the time 


comes to launch a major offensive against Japan, it is ; 


not likely to be by way of Australia. 

Only history will be able to determine whether the 
decision to beat Hitler first was correct. But it is an 
elementary maxim of military strategy to concentrate 
on one foe at a time. And the decision to win the 
European war first having been made, Washington 
intends to adhere unswervingly to it regardless of 
alarums from the southwest Pacific. Nothing short 
of a debacle in that area will budge it from its course. 

JOHN ELLIOTT 


STATES WAR BONDS 








a on | 


~~, -_ | a t+ a st bette Dee see ote, Gee ee he ee [Lae 


