ity of the 
on Rocke. 
irs, called 
his speech 


FORUM ig 
the inter-| 
States has| 
struction! 
entire Ccon- 
inless the} 
00 tons of| 
protested) 
tial manu} 
is sending 
re coming 
ies whose 
fense. 
omplaints, 
ed to find} 
ty has ap 
which has} 
Americaa | 
even after! 
d the Eco} 
ary export 
‘0 develop| 
to hems | 
y to Latin] 
announced 
ereby dis 
allocation} 
would be} 
allocation} 
some such 


is will be 


_ STONE | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


w Ae , 
~Swe De t ¥ 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vor. XXI, No. 4 


NOVEMBER 14, 1941 


—_—_—_- 


STALIN CALLS FOR UNITED RESISTANCE 


HEN the United States, on the eve of the 

twenty-fourth anniversary of the Bolshevik 
revolution, pledged $1,000,000,000 worth of lend- 
lease aid to the Soviet Union, and Stalin, speaking 
in Moscow on November 6, proclaimed that his 
country was united with Britain and America in a 
“war of liberation” against Hitler, the long road 
that has been traveled by the world since 1917 was 
suddenly and startlingly illumined. The two coun- 
tries which, in Communist phraseology, are the prin- 
cipal “capitalist” and “imperialist” powers in the 
world (whose attack, in concert with France and 
Germany, was long feared by the Kremlin), have 
willingly, in fact eagerly, welcomed the opportunity 
of collaborating with the U.S.S.R. And the Soviet 
leaders, who as late as 1939 had denounced both 
groups of belligerents as equally “imperialist,” now 
distinguish between the “reactionary imperialism” of 
Germany, on the one hand, and the Western powers 
which, in the words of Stalin, “possess elementary 
democratic liberties,” such as “trade unions for 
workers and employees.” 

IS RUSSIA FIGHTING ALONE? In his speech 
on the anniversary of the Bolshevik revolution, Stalin 
spoke with the realistic frankness that has charac- 
terized the views of Soviet leaders on foreign affairs. 
He expressed confidence in the eventual defeat of 
the Germans who, he added in a subsequent speech 
at a military review, “are facing disaster’ perhaps 
within a few months or a year. He did not in any 
Way minimize, however, the difficulties confronting 
the Soviet Union in its struggle with the Reich. 
Although he gave astronomical figures of German 
losses—denied by Hitler in a speech at Munich on 
the eighteenth anniversary of the “beer hall putsch” 
—Stalin admitted Russia’s “temporary military re- 
verses."’ These reverses, he said, were due chiefly to 


| the absence of a second front in Europe, and the lack 
| of tanks, airplanes, and various forms of anti-tank 


st 


equipment. If dialectical debate were in order, 
Stalin’s complaint about the absence of a second 
front might be countered by a British complaint that 
it was he who, by signing a non-aggression pact with 
Hitler in 1939, originally saved Germany from a 
two-front war. Such an argument, which in any case 
would be academic today, would overlook the dis- 
trust that the Kremlin, rightly or wrongly, still felt 
for the governments of Chamberlain and Daladier 
in the summer of 1939. But Stalin’s statement that 
Russia “is waging a war of liberation alone, with 
nobody’s assistance, against the united front of Ger- 
mans, Finns, Rumanians, Italians and Hungarians” 
hardly seems fair to the British and their allies. It is 
true that the British have been unable to open a 
second /and front in Europe, and it may be doubted 
that an invasion of the continent at this time would 
prove feasible, in view of Britain’s lack of man 
power and equipment. Stalin’s statement, however, 
disregards entirely the war that the British have 
been waging for two years against Germany at sea 
and in the air. Slow and frequently unspectacular as 
naval warfare may often seem, it cannot be said to 
be without results. If Britain and the United States 
are at all able to supply Russia with armaments and 
raw materials (among which Stalin hopefully men- 
tioned aluminum, lead, tin, nickel and rubber), this 
is due first of all to the fact that the British have 
succeeded in keeping sea lanes open all over the 
world. No amount of admiration for the courage of 
the Red Army and Russian civilians should obscure 
the achievements of the British Navy, and of British 
civilians when subjected to drastic air raids in the past. 

FINLAND'S ROLE IN THE WAR. This does 
not in any way diminish the need for supplying arma- 
ments to Russia, as rapidly and as plentifully as the 
joint efforts of Britain and the United States will 
permit, if Russia is to maintain effective resistance. 
Lord Beaverbrook, British Supply Minister, referred 


to this problem when he told a group of workers in 
Manchester that they had been called on to “fight 
on two fronts,” and urged them to increase produc- 
tion. But Stalin also had in mind a second military 
front which, he said, “undoubtedly . . . will appear 
in the near future.” In addition, he has been urging 
that the British declare war on Finland, Rumania 
and Hungary. The situation with respect to Finland 
is the most pressing, because one of the routes over 
which British and American supplies could be 
shipped into Russia is the Murmansk railway, at 
present menaced by Finnish forces. 

Secretary Hull’s warning to Finland on Novem- 
ber 3, when he urged the Finns to accept Russia’s 
offer of a separate peace (which, he said, had been 
transmitted by the State Department to Helsinki on 
August 18), placed Finland in a most painful situa- 
tion. Finnish leaders have repeatedly indicated that 
they have no desire to link their country’s fate to that 
of Nazi Germany, that they want to stop fighting 
once they have assured the security of Finland, and 
that they would be willing to leave final disposition 
of their territorial conflict with Russia to a future 
conference. But the harsh fact is that the Finns can- 
not pull out of the war without the consent of Hitler, 
and it is obviously not in Germany's interest to have 
Finland abandon the struggle at this juncture. Fin- 
land is no more eager than other small countries to 
be drawn into Hitler's “new order.” But neither is 
it strong enough to resist Nazi reprisals. Unless 
Britain and the United States are ready to give Fin- 
land the protection that they proved unable to offer 
other small countries menaced by Nazi expansion, 
Mr. Hull’s warning can only emphasize the plight 
of small nations without in any way alleviating it. 


THE “WAR OF LIBERATION.” Meanwhile, by 
declaring that the war in which Russia is engaged is 
not a war of “imperialist annexation” but a “war of 
liberation,” Stalin has made a direct appeal to all 

e peoples who have been forced to accept Nazi 


For survey of the Netherlands Indies in wartime, 
and its significance as a large supplier of war 
materials and a strategic link in the defense of 
Southeast Asia, read: 


THE NETHERLANDS INDIES AT WAR 
by T. A. Bisson 
November 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . 25c. per copy 


FOREIGN Poxicy Reports are published on the 1st and 15th 
of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to FPA members, $3. 


Page Two 


——— 


rule, including the Germans. This appeal, whig 
seems to invite the Germans, too, to overthrow “the 
yoke of Hitlerite tyranny,” may be interpreted bi 
some as a new bid, couched in a form different frog, 
that of 1917, for Russian leadership of world, or a 
least European, revolution. And it would be futile / 
deny that the Soviet leaders are offering Europe thei 
concept of a post-war order—today in collaboratiog, 
with Britain and the United States, but tomorroy| 
conceivably in competition with them. The Westen! 
powers will in turn have to formulate, and in practi¢ 
demonstrate, their own concept of the democrati 
order they envisage for the future. Perhaps the clea. 
est indication of the lines along which this problen 
is being considered in the West was given by th 
conference of the International Labor Organization 
in New York and Washington, which closed with 
an address by President Roosevelt on November 6 
The President expressed the dominant thoughts of 
the conference when he said: “In international, a 
in national affairs, economic policy can no longer lx 
an end unto itself alone. It is merely a means fo; 
achieving social objectives. There must be no plac 
in the post-war world for special privilege for eithe; 
individuals or nations.” If the Western powers ca 
implement these words, they need not fear the chal. 
lenge of another world revolution stemming from 
Moscow. But if these words only remain on paper 
then Moscow may yet have a good deal to say about 
the shape of things to come. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


JOSEPH W. SCOTT JOINS FPA STAFF 

The Foreign Policy Association takes pleasure in 
announcing the appointment to the Research Staff of 
Joseph W. Scott. Mr. Scott received his B.A. at the 
University of Texas, his M.A. at the University of 
Virginia, and a certificate in international studies a 
the University of London. He has had wide training 
and experience in the field of economics and in 
practical business affairs. 


Hands Off: A History of the Monroe Doctrine, by Dexter 
Perkins. Boston, Little, Brown, 1941. $3.50 


A clarification, for the general reader, of a cardinal pri» 
ciple of American diplomacy. Professor Perkins is the fore 
most authority on the Monroe Doctrine, about which he has 
previously written three scholarly monographs. 


Dawn Watch in China, by Joy Homer. Boston, Houghton 
Mifflin, 1941. $3.00 


A sympathetic and vigorous account of China at wal 
recording the observations of an adventurous year whic 
carried the author into virtually all sections of the country, 
occupied and unoccupied. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 4, NovemBer 14, 1941. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation#) 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotuHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


8 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


—= 


1, whi 
TOW “th 
reted by 
ent from 
rid, Of a 
futile ty 
‘Ope thei 
aboratio, 
Omorroy 
Westen, 
n Practice! 
emocrati 
the clea. 
 problen| 
m by the 
anization 
sed with 
rember 6, 
yughts of| 
tional, a; 
longer be 
neans for 
no place 
for either 
wers carl 
the chal. 
ing from 
ON paper 
say about 


; DEAN 


“AFF 

leasure in 
h Staff of 
A. at the 
versity of 
studies at 
le training 
cs and in 


_ by Dexter 


rdinal prin 
is the fore 
hich he has 


, Houghton 


ina at wal, 
year whic 
the country, 


—_— $< 
ured. Nationél 

DEAN, Editor) 
ear. | 


The Annual Meeting of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated 


will be held at Hotel Astor, New York, on Thursday, December II, 1941. 
The brief business meeting will be held at 12:15 p.m. immediately preceding the luncheon. 
FRANK ROSS McCOY, President | 


PROXY FOR BOARD OF DIRECTORS 


The candidates listed below have been nominated to serve on the Board of Directors of the Foreign Policy Association, 
Incorporated, as indicated, and have expressed their willingness to act if elected. The word “Re-election” appears after the names 
of the present members of the Board of Dirctors who have consented to run again. 


Persons other than those nominated by the Nominating Committee are eligible to election, and space is provided on 
the proxy for naming such other candidates. Attention is called to the fact that 


“All members of the Board of Directors shall be members of the Association who are so circumstanced 
that they can attend the meetings of the Board regularly.” 


Constitution, Article IV, Paragraph 3. 
In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the candidates receiving the largest number of votes cast at the 
annual meeting December 11, 1941 will be declared elected. 
Please note that proxies cannot be used 


1. unless received at National Headquarters not later than Wednesday, December 10, 1941. 
2. unless the proxy returned is signed by the member. 


Only members of the Association who are citizens of the United States have voting privileges. 


Nominating Committee: Eustace Seligman, Chairman 
Brooks Emeny Mrs. Junius Morgan 
Carlton J.H. Hayes H. Harvey Pike, Jr. 


Please cut along this line and sign and return the proxy to the office of the 
Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


eeeceeeesoeese ee PSOOOOSOOOOSOS SOO HOOOOOOOS OOOO OOOOH SOOSOOIIN 


PROXY 


Put cross (x) beside names of candidates of your choice. 
Vote for one in Class of 1942, one in Class of 1943 and six in Class of 1944. 


I authorize Frank Ross McCoy or William T. Stone to vote for directors of the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, as indicated beloy 
CLASS OF 1942 


| MRS. FREDERIC R. KING | 
. CLASS OF 1943 
| DR. JAMES PHINNEY BAXTER | 
CLASS OF 1944 
WILLIAM A. ELDRIDGE HERBERT L. MAY 
RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
MRS. LEARNED HAND MRS. HOWELL MOORHEAD 
RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTIUN 
WM. W. LANCASTER H. ALEXANDER SMITH 
RE-ELECTION RE-ELECTION 
| 
ERR SEE Se ae in a 


rated 


esident 


—— 


iation, 
names 


led on | 


at the | 


icated below 


TRENDS IN LATIN AMERICA 


NAZI METHODS STIR PROTEST. The whole- 
sale execution of French hostages by German au- 
thorities has provoked widespread indignation 
throughout Latin America, which has always had 
close cultural ties with France. These cold-blooded 
killings have probably done more than volumes of 
Anglo-Saxon propaganda to raise anti-Nazi feeling 
to a new high. A dozen Latin American republics 
have already associated themselves with the Chilean 
government in protesting against the executions, and 
in asking Berlin to end the slaughter. In Cuba, 
Mexico and Uruguay, short periods of silence have 
been observed in tribute to the victims. The Presi- 
dent of the Uruguayan Chamber of Deputies has 
cabled the officers of the Pan American Union, sug- 
gesting that all 21 of the American republics unite 
in a joint protest. The Uruguayan suggestion has 
been duly referred to the individual governments for 
action. 

Reports from Berlin indicate that Nazi leaders are 
both worried and annoyed by the volume of protest 
from overseas, which further complicates the task 
of German diplomacy in this hemisphere. Of late, 
German diplomats have been hard put to it to ex- 
plain away the map of South and Central America 
mentioned in President Roosevelt's Navy Day broad- 
cast of October 27—a map which, according to the 
President’s statement, shows fourteen individual 
Latin American countries reduced to five German- 
dominated vassal states. In Buenos Aires, Santiago 
and elsewhere, German envoys, on instructions from 
Berlin, have officially called at the foreign offices to 
deny the existence of any such plans. The Latin 
American reaction, as gauged by editorial comment 
in a vast majority of influential papers, has been on 
the whole realistic: it was pointed out that, whether 
or not this particular map were authentic and its de- 
tails correct, recent events on the European continent 
had clearly. demonstrated that the arbitrary re- 
arrangement of frontiers is an integral part of Nazi 
plans for a “new order.” 

LULL IN BORDER FIGHTING. Statesmen of 
the American republics are heartened by the absence 
of fresh incidents on the Ecuadorean-Peruvian bor- 
der, where almost constant fighting was in progress 
during the months of July, August and September. 
Like the three-year Chaco War between Bolivia and 
Paraguay (1932-35), this latest inter-American con- 
flict results from the inability of the contending par- 
ties to solve a century-old frontier dispute. Thus far, 


For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, a bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. Write 


= By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH 


the fighting has gone entirely in favor of the Peruvi- 
an forces which, more numerous and better equipped, 
successfully invaded a large portion of Ecuadorean 
territory. 


The present lull in hostilities dates from the sign- 
ing of a truce on October 2 in the Peruvian town of 
Talara. By virtue of this truce, a ‘demilitarized 
zone’’ was established on former Ecuadorean terri- 
tory, to be policed by Ecuadorean civilians. A decree 
of Ecuadorean President Carlos Arroyo del Rio, 
issued on November 6, implements the terms of the 
Talara understanding. The Ecuadorean police con- 
tingents are to be unarmed, and are to include no 
one who has served in the country’s armed forces 
during the past ten years. Every effort will be made 
to avoid clashes with Peruvian civil or military 
authorities. 


The invidious task of putting an end to fighting 
between the two republics has fallen to Argentina, 
Brazil and the United States. These three powers had 
already offered their services as mediators in. May 
1941. Although this offer did not suffice to ward off 
the actual outbreak of hostilities in July, all three 
powers have had official observers on the scene since 
that time. It was under the auspices of the three 
mediating countries that the Talara truce was signed, 
and the Ecuadorean police in the “demilitarized 
zone’’ are directly responsible to them. On Septem- 
ber 18 the government of Mexico proposed that the 
three-power mediation be replaced by a joint inter- 
American effort, in which all the American republics 
would participate. This suggestion, welcomed in 
Ecuador, was unfavorably received in Peru. It is not 
likely to be adopted unless efforts to reach a solution 
on the present basis fail completely. Students of the 
problem fear that hostilities might be resumed once 
the present rainy season is over. Meanwhile, bitter- 
ness between the two South American republics is 
being exploited both in Quito and Lima by Nazi 
propagandists, who ridicule Pan-American efforts at 
mediation and ascribe ulterior motives to the medi- 
ators, particularly the United States. 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: ALLIES BOLSTER NEAR EAST FRONT 
Speaker: Louis E. Frechtling 
Date: Sunday, November 16 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., EST, over NBC 
For station, please consult your local newspaper 


to National Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y., for sample copy. 


| 
| 


! 
i} 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 11—The twenty-third anniversary of the 
Armistice finds Washington once again a wartime 
capital, although as yet the war is undeclared. Not 
since the fateful days of 1918 has Washington seen 
such intense diplomatic activity or been thrust so 
squarely into the center of the world scene. 


WARTIME CAPITAL. During the past fort- 
night, the dominant position of the United States in 
the world balance of power has been emphasized by 
decisive events at home and abroad. It has been rec- 
ognized by Congress and the Executive branch of 
the government, by the governments of all countries 
resisting the Axis in Europe and Asia, and even by 
official spokesmen in the capitals of the Axis powers. 


On the domestic front, recognition of our wartime 
status was clearly written in the series of legislative 
and executive steps designed to implement the Ad- 
ministration’s fundamental foreign policy. These 
steps included: 


(1) The action of the Senate on November 9 re- 
pealing the shipping restrictions of the Neutrality 
Act by a vote of 50 to 37, and the decision of Con- 
gressional leaders to press for concurrent action by 
the House this week so as to permit the arming 
of American merchant vessels and their passage 
through combat zones into belligerent ports. 


(2) The exchange of letters between President 
Roosevelt and Joseph Stalin, released November 7, 
in which the American government pledged the So- 
viet government a loan of $1,000,000,000 from lend- 
lease funds, to be repaid without interest over a ten- 
year period beginning five years after the end of 
the war. 


(3) The warning to Finland to discontinue offen- 
sive military operations against Russia, made public 
by Secretary Hull on November 3 in a press confer- 
ence statement. This warning was rejected by Fin- 
land on November 12, in a note stating that the 
Helsinki government could not agree to expose the 
country to future peril by interrupting military opera- 
tions before its objective was wholly realized. 

(4) The announcement that the United States gov- 
ernment is considering the withdrawal of American 
Marines from China, made public by Mr. Roosevelt 
on November 7 in a manner which suggested a warn- 
ing to Japan that this country is prepared for a show- 
down in the Far East. 


But Washington’s key role in the war has beep 
recognized even more dramatically in Europe and 
Asia. The appointment of Maxim Litvinoff, former 
Soviet Foreign Commissar, as Ambassador to Wash. 
ington has been accepted here as convincing proof 
that Russia intends to continue its resistance to the 
bitter end. European diplomats, however, interpret 
the move as a clear indication that Stalin regards 
Washington as the most vital diplomatic post in the 


world, at this turning point, and the potential center | 


of the coalition against Hitler. 


The war of nerves in the Far East has brought still 
further evidence of the strategic importance of the 
United States in the calculations of both the democ. 
racies and the Axis powers. The Japanese govern- 
ment, in dispatching Saburo Kurusu to Washington 
on a special mission to assist Ambassador Nomura 
in a final effort to avoid a clash in the Pacific, was 
well aware of the shift in the balance of power. And 
when Prime Minister Winston Churchill made his 
blunt declaration on November 10 that if hostilities 
should break out between Japan and the United 
States, Britain would declare war “‘within the hour,” 
he was equally aware of the strategic position of this 
government. 


WAR AND PEACE AIMS. If the United States 
is to turn the balance of power in this war as in the 
last, however, American statesmanship and Ameti- 


sume the responsibilities of world power than they 
were twenty-three years ago. Confronted with Hit- 


| 
| 
| 


Vou. X 


| 


C 0) 
7 
the cc 
envoy, 
Kurus 
enced 
contin 
Unite 
dence. 
made 
who 

the n¢ 


| ther c 


i 


| 


ler’s challenge to all free nations, President Roose: | 


velt has accepted the responsibility of proclaiming 
the war aims of the United States in terms which 
leave no doubt as to the ultimate objective. We are 
now committed to the destruction of Hitler and the 
Nazi régime. We have rejected the thought of com- 
promise and appeasement and are pledged to con- 
tinued pressure upon the Nazi system until it 
collapses. 


But it will not be enough to state our war aims 
without thought of the peace which eventually must 
follow. If our peace aims are to be realized, they 
must offer tangible hope to the masses of people in 
all countries, including the German people. And un- 
less our peace aims hold open this hope we face 
again the tragic possibility that the sacrifice will have 
been in vain. 


W. T. STONE 


DI] 
before 


ister ” 


: ae ™ 
can public opinion must be better prepared to as- | signs 


ist po 
his ca 
eral ’ 
force: 
erate 
“com 
event 
Prem 
utmo 
war | 
two < 
obstri 
ond, 

Japas 
threa 
Axis 

eign 

“fort 
view: 
to cc 
Asia 


