AMY a?! i I¥2 





are an °AIN 
os th ae 


eae y >? HM pe 


war 27 1946 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 





| FOREIGN 





POLICY BULLETIN 











0" An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
Bie 








5s FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

ad | 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 

ts | Vou. XXV, No. 22 MarcH 15, 1946 
awe 

* : TREND TOWARD RIVAL BLOCS ENDANGERS UNO 

‘ les MORE than a week has passed since former Prime Secretary Byrnes, in turn, flatly rejected on 


ad. 8 Minister Churchill spoke before an American 
e sqm midwestern audience on March 5. The speech has 
+ frp attracted wide attention, and on March 11 Pravda, 
Joves official Communist organ in Moscow, charged that 
e wif his proposals were clearly a threat of war. Yet 
ds pq his plea for a “fraternal association” between 
» fag} the United States and Britain, backed by an outright 
- imm military alliance, and his strongly worded criticisms 
g-estay Of Russia have not been placed in their proper pub- 
of th lic perspective by government officials either in 
Texy Washington or London. In the meantime, events re- 
ace q veal increasing Big Three differences that call for 

the most fundamental examination of our foreign 
are hp policy—especially its relation to the United Nations 
of Ne Organization which, according to President Tru- 

| man’s only direct reference on March 8 to Mr. 
of jg Churchill’s speech, we are continuing to support 
with vigor. 


cased GROWING TENSIONS. Mr. Churchill’s note of 
to he urgency is only one evidence of Big Three tensions. 
|, whit) Both the British and American governments have 
sent stiff notes to Moscow, similar in content and 
tone, protesting Russia’s failure to withdraw its 
troops from Iran by March 2, as had been previous- 
ly arranged. Washington reports of March 7 indi- 
cate that Moscow now supports claims, put forward 
by the Armenian Republic of the USSR, demanding 


ittee 


Sere REE 
Pe cee: 


the Moscow Agreement—an interpretation which 


March 11. In the meantime, by March 10, Russian 
army forces in the Far East had withdrawn from the 
troubled city of Mukden, where fighting has since 
broken out between Chinese Communist troops and 
Central government forces. But reports about Man- 
churia continue to reveal differences between the 
Allies on the political and economic future of that 
area, China’s most industrialized region. 


HOW GREAT ARE BIG THREE DIFFERENCES? 
Any interpretation of Mr. Churchill’s speech must 
recognize that he has pointed up quite bluntly many 
of the present conflicts among the Big Three. In 
America and Britain, Mr. Churchill stands virtually 
alone as an elder statesman who warned against 
those policies which led directly to the conflict with 
the Axis powers. Yet the fact that he has failed to 
clarify fully the grave issues he exposes leads to two 
important questions. First, if relations among the 
Big Three are as strained as Churchill implies, why 
do not members of the American or British govern- 
ments, now holding official positions, so inform their 
constituents ? Secondly, do Mr. Churchill’s proposals 
offer the next best step to resolve current Big Three 
disputes ? 

President Truman has thrown the mantle of free 
speech about the eminent British visitor, and it a 
pears that neither the President nor the State De- 
partment cares to support Churchill’s analysis and 
recommendations in full. Yet there has been no 
categorical denial that the Administration favors 
those views. The same may be said of Prime Min- 
ister Attlee and the Labor government in Britain. 
Perhaps the soundest interpretation that can be 
placed on the resulting tacit approval of an Anglo- 
American military alliance is that such a coalition is 
inevitable if war occurs. Much criticism has been 


OLLES Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


usalem feturn of the Turkish provinces of Kars and Arda- 
Europ han. British and American fears are also aroused by 
uy. Russian plans for a change at the Dardanelles, 
pli known to be on the Soviet agenda. The USSR, on 
Eastey the other hand, sent a note, made public on March 
r natit 8, to Washington, protesting that America’s memo- 
ling # tandum of February 22 to Bulgaria on the broaden- 
uropes 0g of its left wing government, was a violation of 








2 PRO LR SCT ME GR : 


ee 


went 


f 
I 
+ 
{ 
ii 
‘ 














heaped on statesmen of the periods before the last 
two great wars for not having made it unmistakably 
clear that the western democracies would fight to- 
gether against German aggression. And today, if war 
is imminent, 4 storm warning is also needed. But in 
such a case official spokesmen should fully inform 
the electorate in both Britain and America about the 
precarious status of Big Three affairs. 

For lack of clear official statements about Mr. 
Churchill's proposals, the British and American pub- 
lic may well be disturbed about their future course 
abroad. There can be no doubt that if Britain and 
the United States must combine for security reasons, 
as they have in two past world wars, then their poli- 
cies must also be examined jointly in the economic 
realm, and in connection with the dependent areas 
under their sovereignty. This Mr. Churchill failed 
to do in any thorough fashion. He can hardly be 
unaware of the continued criticism in this country 
of British policy in Palestine, India, and other parts 
of the Empire. Moreover, his speech reflected little 
understanding of the historic reluctance with which 
the American people approach anything like preven- 
tive war which, in effect, his words implied. Nor 
was his message designed to make any easier the 
Washington Administration’s task of convincing 
Congress that it should pass the $3,750,000,000 loan 
to Britain. Because he found it possible to override 
these basic practical considerations, there is even 
greater need for official interpretations to place his 
proposals in their proper light. 

NEXT STEP — UNO OR SEPARATE BLOCS? 
The Churchill thesis may be explained on a narrow 
view of British interest, for it is quite evident that 
Britain's empire outposts are being severely threat- 


FRENCH YIELD TO CHINESE AND ANNAMITE DEMANDS IN INDO.-CHINA 


Since mid-October the Annamite uprising against 
the French in Indo-China has been over-shadowed 
by the fury of the Indonesian struggle against the 
Dutch, but the headlines have recently shifted once 
more to significant developments in France’s Far 
Eastern possession, which contains more than one- 
third of the inhabitants of the French colonial em- 
pire. Two important agreements have been signed 
by the French—one with the Chinese on February 28 
providing for the withdrawal of Chinese troops from 
the northern half of Indo-China, and the other with 
Annamite nationalists on March 6. In the latter, ac- 
cording to Admiral Georges Thierry d’Argenlieu, 
French High Commissioner in Indo-China, the 
French recognized the Viet Nam Republic (Viet 
Nam is the ancient name for Annam) as a free state 
within the Indo-Chinese Federation and the reorgan- 
ized French empire. Ominous predictions that the 
Annamites would fight French efforts to land troops 
in the northern province of Tonkin were upset by 
this unexpected settlement, for on March 8 the 


Page Two 











a 
— 


ened not only by Russian actions, but by rising 
lonial nationalism. Thus harassed, the British em, 
pire may naturally seek aid for defensive purposes 
But Churchill and any other Big Three statesmen, 
who give lip service to the belief that differences be. 
tween the western powers and the USSR will be 
resolved by erecting tightly knit blocs to operate 
within the structure of the UNO, either misread the 
possibilities of that nascent world organization, 
desire to use it merely as the machinery to car 

forward a power struggle which will surely lead to 
World War III. 

It is unrealistic to suppose that the UNO has suff. 
cient independent strength to prevent conflicts 
among the Big Three. But the next best step would 
not appear to be a division among them either within 
or outside the UNO’s framework. When the UNO 
has not been fully launched, when the United Na. 
tions have thus far only the barest plans for world 
economic cooperation, and when the major issues of 
international control for the production and use of 
atomic energy have yet to be decided, it is too early 
to adopt policies which by their very nature lead to 
exclusive combinations. In an age when every analy- 
sis of international problems reveals the need for 
world-wide solutions, it may appear superficially 
logical that, if full agreement is unattainable, lim- 
ited arrangements or alliances are necessary. Yet it 
is but a measure of the changed nature of world 
affairs in the atomic era—involving in effect a new 
logic—that half measures will be futile. To fail in 
pursuit of broader agreement may result in war, but 
separation into opposing blocs will inevitably lead 
to that tragedy. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


French entered the port of Haiphong without op- 
position, although two days earlier a sharp exchange 


= 


the n 
provi 
Frenc 
all F 
dent 
treat} 
Chin: 
autor 
visor: 
defer 
Ex 
have 
full | 
a ne\ 
Fren 
nortl 
Chin 
who 
repat 
have 
citize 
tiona 
ary 
extra 
Chin 
draw 
way 
with 
TI 
Fren 
en tl 
of P 
of ei 
part 
the 
men 
over 
the . 
at le 





of fire between French warships and Chinese shore 
batteries had delayed the French landings. Accord: 
ing to a French Foreign Office spokesman, this in- 
cident resulted probably from the fact that the Chi- 
nese local commander had not been informed of the 
treaty arrangements. 

ANNAMITES WIN CONCESSSIONS. The un: 
expectedly peaceful return of the French to Tonkin 


may be attributed to the realistic concessions which , 


Admiral d’Argenlieu evidently carried back to Indo- 
China after his recent recall to Paris. In addition to 
recognizing the Viet Nam Republic’s authority in 
Tonkin and that part of Annam north of latitude 
16°, the French are reported to have conceded at 
least two other important points. A plebiscite is 
be held to determine whether the Viet Nam Re 
public is to be extended to include southern Annam 
and Cochin-China, and French troops are to be 1 
moved gradually until all have been withdrawn from 


| Alth 
\ ing 

turn 
not 

troll 
ball 
Har 


G 
tion 
lic t 
fact 
stea 
Brit 
FORE 
Headc 
secon: 
one o 





28s If 


nen, 


x 


tate 


» Of 


arty 
1 to 


licts 
uld 
thin 
NO 
Na- 
orld 
s of 
e of 
arly 
d to 
aly- 
for 
ally 
lim- 
ot it 
orld 
new 
1 in 
but 
lead 


NA 


nge 
10re 
ord: 


in 


Chi- 
the 


ikin 
hich 
ido- 
n to 
y in 
ude 
1 at 
$ tO 


1am 
' £e 
rom 











A 
eee 


the new state at the end of five years. The agreement 

rovides for a temporary occupation force of 15,000 
French and 10,000 Viet Nam troops under an over- 
all French command. The French had set a prece- 
dent for negotiations by signing on January 6 a 
treaty with the ruler of Cambodia, another of Indo- 
China’s five regions, granting the Cambodians an 
autonomous government with French technical ad- 
yisors and French control of foreign affairs and 
defense. 

Explosive events in Southeast Asia since V-J Day 
have accentuated the necessity of carrying out to the 
full French war-time promises to grant Indo-China 
anew political status. Among notable influences on 
French policy has been the presence in Indo-China, 
north of the 16th parallel, of more than 100,000 
Chinese occupation troops under General Lu Han, 
who are there by Allied agreement, to disarm and 
repatriate the Japanese. Officially the Chinese troops 
have remained neutral but they have disarmed French 
citizens and shown their sympathy for Annamite na- 
tionalism in numerous ways. In the treaty of Febru- 
ary 28, the French not only had to abandon their 
extraterritorial rights and special concessions in 
China but, in order to persuade the Chinese to with- 
draw, had to grant them extensive rights on the rail- 
way which connects the Chinese province of Yunnan 
with the Indo-Chinese port of Haiphong. 

The Chinese position has also embarrassed the 
French because it enabled the Annamites to strength- 
en their organization. Under the dynamic leadership 
of President Ho Chi Minh, who claims the support 
of eight million members of the coalition Viet Minh 
patty, the Republic of Viet Nam held on January 6 
the country’s first general elections to choose 400 





_ members of a National Assembly. Every Annamite 


over 18, male and female, literate and illiterate, had 
the right to vote for representatives who had to be 
at least 23 years of age and able to read and write. 
Although the French ridiculed the elections, charg- 
ing irregularities and coercion at the polls, the re- 
turns revealed a landslide for Ho Chi Minh’s party 
not only in the north but even in the French con- 
trolled south from which the results of clandestine 
balloting were carried to Ho Chi Minh’s capital in 
Hanoi by a Chinese soldier motorcyclist. 
GUERRILLA WAR STILL POSSIBLE. In addi- 
tion to the prestige brought to the Viet Nam Repub- 
lic through the elections, the French have to face the 
fact that Ho Chi Minh’s armed forces have grown 
steadily. While the French, in agreement with 
British forces stationed in the southern zone, have 


=——- Page Three — 














(ae 


moved in troops until Major General Jacques Leclerc 
is said to have 60,000 men under his command, 
Annamite guerrillas have fought delaying engage- 
ments, suffering an estimated 4,000 casualties, and 
have retreated into the northern zone. That the French 
reconquest of the south is complete was indicated 
on March 4 by an announcement from Admiral Lord 
Louis Mountbatten’s headquarters that Indo-China 
would no longer be in the Southeast Asia Command 
after midnight that night. But in the north Ho Chi 
Minh is said to have an army of 50,000 men, ill 
trained and poorly armed perhaps, but ready to retire 
to the hills and fight a prolonged guerrilla war sup- 
ported by native peoples who have been subjected to 
intensive anti-French indoctrination by Annamite 
teachers during the past six months. Obviously gen- 
erous concessions on the part of the French were 
necessary to prevent an explosion. 

Another symptom of this dangerous situation was 
the recent news from Saigon that on two occasions 
groups of French soldiers had assaulted French 
demonstrators who petitioned the government to 
recognize the Viet Nam Republic. Finally French 
policy was very likely influenced by the significant 
Cabinet change following the resignation of Gen- 
eral de Gaulle. On January 28 the old Ministry of 
Colonies, now renamed the Ministry of France Over- 
seas, was taken over by the Socialist Marius Moutet, 
who ten years ago tried to introduce reforms in the 
French administration of Indo-China when he was 
Minister of Colonies in Leon Blum’s Popular Front 
government. 

The burden of proof remains on the French. If 
the spirit in which they carry out their agreement 
with the Viet Nam Republic is progressive and far- 
sighted, they may be setting a significant precedent 
for future peace and order in Southeast Asia. A valu- 
able step forward would be the replacement of 
Admiral d’Argenlieu by a civilian High Commis- 
sioner. Last spring the issue of whether to place a 
civilian or a military man at the head of the new 
Indo-Chinese régime was warmly debated in Paris 
between an old guard of colonial military men and 
a progressive wing of colonial reformers. The ap- 
pointment of d’Argenlieu was a victory for the mili- 
tary, but the reformers have not lost hope. 


VERNON McCKAy 





China’s Postwar Markets, by Chih Tsang. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1945. $3.50 
The author, a Chinese businessman, surveys China’s 
potentialities as a market, and goes into considerable de- 
tail concerning both imports and exports. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 22, MARcH 15, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Poiicy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera Micueies Danan, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








ee eer 


coer ee apie gd JON pean - Se 


3s Ry 


28 


fern 






ee eel eeeniaatieantad A” en's lye are tm he a gag ceh 


— gg ts Gee eae 


x 








Pe ee ee ne ed 
very TR 


MINS EE a 





Washington News Letter 














LOCAL AND NATIONAL INTERESTS CLASH OVER ST. LAWRENCE TREATY 


A flaw will mar the “special relations” between 
the United States and Canada, to which Winston 
Churchill referred in his address at Fulton, Missouri, 
as long as the United States fails to ratify the Deep 
Water Treaty which the two governments signed in 
1932. The treaty provides for a system of wide 
canals around the International Rapids of the St. 
Lawrence River, through which ocean vessels could 
pass and then ply the Great Lakes as far west as 
Duluth, and for the construction of a dam at Inter- 
national Rapids which would create 2,200,000 horse- 
power of hydroelectric capacity. 


CASE FOR THE WATERWAY. Today the rec- 
ognition by the United States that it is a world 
power, and the uncertainties of international rela- 
tions, render the arguments of the project’s sup- 
porters more formidable than they have been in the 
past, when Congress twice rejected the treaty—first 
in 1934, and again in 1944. Since February 18 a 
subcommittee of the Senate Foreign Relations Com- 
mittee has been holding hearings on a resolution that 
embodies the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Agreement 
of 1941, which includes the 1932 treaty. 

The case for the Waterway rests partly on the 
security needs of the United States and its northern 
neighbor at a time when the attention which the 
War Department is giving to Arctic defenses under- 
lines Canada’s growing military importance. The 
existence of the Waterway might strengthen Can- 
ada economically and increase its western population. 
And by turning the cities on the Great Lakes into 
ocean ports, the Waterway could decrease isolation- 
ism in the American Middle West, since the traffic 
would disclose the advantages of world trade. 


Moreover, the new route could reduce the burden 
on the railways of the United States cps Fen 
when commodities awaiting shipment exceed avail- 
able car space; and the manufacture of electric 
power at International Rapids would greatly increase 
the industrial capacity of the United States. In a 
message to Congress on October 3, 1945, President 
Truman recalled that electric power from the Ten- 
nessee Valley Authority and the Columbia River 
Basin had made possible the program of military 
airplane manufacture during World War II. Secre- 
tary of War Robert Patterson on February 18 wrote 
to the State Department that the Waterway would 
strengthen national security as a “reserve route” to 
an area where ships might be built and repaired in 
relative safety. 


Opposition to the Waterway nevertheless remains 
strong. Since the accord between the federal gov. 
ernment and New York State for the division of 
power from the proposed hydroelectric plant re. 
quires that “no part of the United States share of 
the water in the International Rapids section shall 
be diverted for the benefit of any persons or private 
corporation,” private power companies, especially in 
New York State, have reasons for hostility toward 
the St. Lawrence Waterway, although they have not 
taken part in the hearings. The center of opposition 
in New York State is the city of Buffalo, which 
depends for some of its prosperity on the movement 
of commodities from the Middle West to the eastern 
seaboard through Buffalo. 

Railway labor fears that the Waterway would 
divert much railway traffic to ships on the Great 
Lakes-St. Lawrence route. The coal mining industry 
objects on the ground that the Waterway would 
enable foreign countries to send coal by ship to the 
north-central United States at a lower price than 
Pennsylvania producers can send it by rail. Maritime 
New England believes that the opening of seaports 
in the Middle West would harm Boston, the north- 
ernmost of the large Atlantic ports of the United 
States. The Mississippi Valley Association opposes 
the project for fear that goods now transported 
to the sea southward along the Mississippi would 


move eastward through the Great Lakes. Louisiana — 


and Texas have been unfavorable because of the 
possibility that New Orleans and Houston might 
lose some of their sea trade to the Great Lakes ports. 

OUTLOOK FOR APPROVAL. The political 
complexion of the Waterway debate is somewhat 


different today from what it was in 1934 and 1944. | 


Formerly the effort to pass or defeat the Treaty has 
resulted mainly in a struggle between Senators whose 
states stood to benefit or lose from the treaty. There 
are, however, a large number of Senators from dis- 
interested States to be attracted to one side or the 
other. Some might oppose the Treaty because of its 
expense; others might favor it for its contribution 
to national security. The campaign in the Senate in 
favor of the Waterway is now led by Carl Hatch, 
Democrat from one of the disinterested States, New 
Mexico. Since he is chairman of the subcommittee 
which is holding the hearings, the Waterway reso- 
lution probably will be sent to the Senate with a 
favorable report. The resolution requires both Senate 


and House approval. BLairR BOLLES 











