which 
oth of 
asurer, 


nolders 
tgages, 


ywners, 
stock- 
mpany, 
on the 
> name 
1; also 
*s full 
which 
of the 
that of 
y other 
in the 


ated. 
Editor. 

1936. 
Public. 

-M-338. 


— 
National 
Editor. 


{ 
4 
: 
‘a 
' 
4 
: 


, 
: 
4 


Se A sail el oe ast dl 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


VoL. XV) No. 51 


OCTOBER 16, 1936 


F. P. A. Evening Discussion Meeting 
October 19th 


The Next Four Years in Foreign Relations 


Speakers: The Honorable Sumner Welles 
Charles P. Taft 
Margaret I. Lamont 
Followed by discussion and questions from the floor 
HoTet Astor, New York 8:30 P.M 


- PROMPTLY 


Entered as  second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


CAN DEMOCRACY HOLD 


ITS OWN IN EUROPE? 


by VERA MICHELES DEAN 
Mrs. Dean is just back from a two months’ visit to Europe 


HE governments of France and Britain, 

confronted at home by growing friction 
between Right and Left extremists, and abroad 
by the threat of a Fascist-Communist clash over 
Spain, are groping for an answer to the question 
which haunts Europe: Can democracy, without 
sacrificing its essential character, hold both civil 
and international war at bay ?—or must it, in self- 
defense, don the trappings of dictatorship? 

As political passions, fanned by the increasing 
difficulties of the Madrid government, rise in 
Western democracies, the extent to which these 
passions may be allowed free play becomes daily 
a more pressing issue. Should the democracies 
permit unrestricted propagation of both Fascist 
and Communist faiths or, denying their own prin- 
ciples, suppress them before they have thrown 
democratic society into turmoil? Will not an over- 
indulgent democracy succumb before the on- 
slaught of militant Right or Left movements, as 
the German republic succumbed to National So- 
cialism, which utilized all the facilities offered 
by democratic administration to impose a rigid 
dictatorship? In seeking to answer these ques- 
tions, it is well to realize that toleration of con- 
flicting ideologies within the democratic state 
need not be synonymous with political agnosticism. 
In a democracy which has not become the victim 
of its own inertia, there can and should be freedom 
to profess all political faiths—not least that of 
democracy. If the peoples of democratic coun- 
tries want to preserve the values of their social 
and political system, they can do so only by fighting 
for them with a zeal equal to that displayed by 
Fascists and Communists—not by turning their 
backs on the political arena in the hope of escap- 
ing the toil and din of battle. In the past, democ- 
racy achieved its victories not by subservience 
and compromise, but by fearlessly combating the 


forces of feudalism, monarchy and hereditary 
privilege. If democracy is to survive today, it 
must re-examine its premises in the cold light of 
self-criticism, and refurbish its weapons for an 
attack on the social and economic maladjustments 
of modern society which give rise to Right or 
Left extremism. 


Just as at home democracy need not be synony- 
mous with political agnosticism, abroad it need 
not be synonymous with indiscriminate pacifism. 
To turn the other cheek at every slap inflicted by 
aggressive dictatorships is not to foster peace but 
to invite war. The democracies have no business 
meddling with the internal affairs of dictatorial 
countries. If the Germans can put up with Na- 
tional Socialism, if the Russians find their fulfill- 
ment in communism, the democracies have no 
legitimate ground to interfere, much as they may 
resent both communism and fascism. But the 
moment a dictatorship oversteps its national 
boundaries and seeks to convert other peoples by 
force to the faith it professes, then the democra- 
cies, by supine acquiescence, run the risk of com- 
mitting suicide for the sake of winning a tem- 
porary reprieve from conflict. The democracies 
should neglect no opportunity to negotiate with 
the dictatorships on the basis of a constructive 
political and economic program calling for adjust- 
ments on both sides—but not wait for the dictator- 
ships to lay down the terms or block the progress 
of international negotiations. To demand peace 
at any price—even if the price involves destruc- 
tion of the values created by Western civilization 
in the past—is a dangerous form of defeatism. 
It is an admission that nothing is worth a struggle 
on the democratic side, and encourages the worst 
excesses of dictatorships. 


The “peace at any price” doctrine is based on 
the assumption that by displaying the slightest 
sign of resistance the democracies will inevitably 
provoke war. Obviously, the danger of war is 


ever present in a world armed to the teeth, where 
not only bodies but minds are daily schooled in 
military drill. But there is no reason to assume 
that clearly defined opposition to the bellicose 
gestures and irresponsible threats characteristic 
of dictatorships will bring on war more readily 
than unquestioning acceptance of any terms the 
dictatorships may impose. Sooner or later the 
democracies will find it necessary to make a last 
stand against the wave of political fanaticism 
sweeping Europe. Is it not better to make this 
stand today, when it may still serve as a deterrent 
to aggression, than when one concession after 
another has been granted to the dictatorships in 
the hope of inducing them to keep the peace? Dif- 
ficult as it is to reach a decision which may make 
or mar the future of Europe, the Western democ- 
racies cannot indefinitely pursue their soliloquy 
on the theme “‘to be or not to be” if they are to 
avoid the danger of finding that the dictatorships 
have already taken the decision out of their hands. 


LONDON MUFFLES SOVIET THREAT 


The Soviet Union’s brusque threat on October 7, 
to withdraw from the London non-intervention 
agreement of August 28 unless violations were 
halted, interrupted the deliberations of the Lon- 
don committee set up to observe fulfillment of 
the Spanish “neutrality” pact. In a session fea- 
tured by counter-charges and recriminations, the 
Italian, German and Portuguese representatives 
hotly denied the allegations made by the U.S.S.R. 
and the Spanish Republican government to the 
effect that airplanes, poison gas and other mili- 
tary assistance were being furnished the Rebels 
via Portugal. The meeting ended with requests 
for further information from the various govern- 
ments concerned—a striking example of the pro- 
cedure under which the Spanish civil war has been 
localized by turning a blind eye toward assistance 
rendered the combatants. 


A solution for the momentarily tense situation 
created by the Soviets’ dramatic démarche was 
indicated by the U.S.S.R. itself in a note of Oc- 
tober 6, not published until after it had threat- 
ened to withdraw from the non-intervention pact. 
This communication merely alleged that the Por- 
tuguese government was violating the agreement 
and proposed that a committee of investigation be 
sent to the Portuguese-Spanish frontier to ascer- 
tain the facts. In view of the British govern- 
ment’s apparent inclination to yield to domestic 
pressure and back such a proposal, it appeared 
likely that the non-intervention committee, by 


Page Two = 


such a move, might temporarily placate supporters 
of both factions in Spain. 

The Soviet Union’s action at a time when no 
European power appears desirous of precipitating 
a Continental crisis was probably motivated by 
diplomatic considerations exceeding the scope of 
the Spanish revolt itself. Concerned as it has 
been for months with regard to the solidity of the 
Franco-Soviet alliance, the Soviet Union perhaps 
intended to accentuate the trend toward a division 
of Europe into two blocs—one Fascist and the 
other composed of the democratic states and the 
U.S.S.R. Such an alignment would link France 
and Britain firmly with the Soviets, in opposition 
to the Fascist dictatorships; jeopardize the pos- 
sibility of an Anglo-French rapprochement with 
Germany on the basis of a Western Locarno, 
which might isolate the Soviet Union in the East; 
and permit the diplomatic initiative to pass into 
the hands of an anti-Fascist coalition. However 
desirable this objective may be, it cannot be said 
that the Soviet maneuver has advanced the pos- 
sibility of its consummation. On the contrary, the 
Blum government, faced with Communist dissat- 
isfaction at home because of its non-intervention 
policy, will be even less amenable to suggestions 
from Moscow. Blum’s willingness to support 
Britain’s peace-at-any-price policy was re-em- 
phasized during a conversation with Anthony 
Eden on October 9, when the French government 
agreed with London that it would continue to ob- 
serve neutrality in Spain. Should the Soviet 
Union withdraw from the non-intervention agree- 
ment, it would thus find itself engaged in a race 
with Germany and Italy to ship arms to the bel- 
ligerents—one in which the U.S.S.R. could not 
hope to prevail. 

This inconclusive diplomatic sparring was not 
matched on the actual field of battle, where there 
appeared to be little hope that the Spanish gov- 
ernment forces could hold Madrid. With a solid 
juncture established between northern and south- 
ern Rebel armies and the Straits open for Rebel 
contact with Morocco, General Franco’s army 
advanced slowly on the capital from the west while 
holding firm north and northeast of the city. 
If the government forces permit the railway 
to Alicante, on the east coast—which has already 
been bombed at Aranjuez—to fall into Rebel 
hands, the stage would be set for a siege which 
might starve out the capital in the end. The war 
could then continue in eastern Spain, but the 
moral effect of Madrid’s fall would be enormous 
and would probably lead to recognition of the 
Rebels by the leading European powers. 


DAVID H. POPPER 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN Vol. XV, No. 51, Ocroser 16, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOnp Lestig BUELL, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


< 
ls 
—* 


eS eS CC Ll Ul rlUhc el 


