


nnu- 
Lion 
2Ots 
nte 

rieg 
toa 
may 


de. 
ndis- 
nany 
ries, 
‘rom 


1 the 
ction 
7hen 
hori- 
to 4 
Nnces, 
uest, 
lered 
_ the 
» for 
F the 
nited 


igure 
-COn- 
ed in 


od to 
| and 
in. be 
1iNes, 
t, the 
$ all 
revel 
essit} 


SER 
National 


+. Leet, 
w York, 








Dr. William w, Bishop Entered as 2nd class matter 
% University of Michigan Library 


Aan Arbor, Mich, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 23 


Marcu 27, 1942 





U.S. AND AUSTRALIA FORGE MACHINERY OF COLLABORATION 


HE announcement, on March 17, that General 

MacArthur had been appointed Supreme Com- 
mander in the Southwest Pacific, with headquarters 
in Australia, is important not only as a promise of 
offensive action against Japan, but also as a symbol 
of rapidly increasing collaboration between the 
United States and the British Commonwealth. The 
people of this country and of Australia, who share 
a common heritage of pioneering and experimenta- 
tion, have been more prompt than the British in 
discarding time-honored customs and nationalistic 
fetishes that might hamper the war effort. The pool- 


ing of men, ships and armaments, and now of mili- 


tary leadership, is a necessary prelude to unified 
command in the Southwest Pacific. It is also a pre- 
view of the many forms international collaboration 
might take in post-war years. 

AUSTRALIA’S DEMAND FOR EQUALITY. 
The growing desire of Australia for closer ties with 
the United States need not, as feared by some quar- 
ters in London, create a rift in the British Empire. 
The Australians realize that the United Kingdom, 
with a population of 46 million, cannot deploy suf- 
ficient military and industrial power to man all 
fronts—especially when a German spring offensive 
looms in Libya and the Near East. Australia itself 
has actively helped the British with men and ma- 
terial, notably in Africa, Greece, and Malaya. Now 
that it, in turn, is exposed to mortal danger, it has 
quite understandably sought help from the United 
States, which is in a better geographic and industrial 
position than Britain to send aid. 

At the same time, Australian leaders demand an 
equal voice in a Pacific War Council—which they 
would like to see established in Washington—as 
well as in the existing Anglo-American boards for 
the pooling of ships, raw materials and munitions. 

is view was forcefully expressed by Herbert V. 
Evatt, Australian Minister for External Affairs, on 


his arrival in Washington on March 20. Australia’s 
orientation toward the United States can be inter- 
preted—and has been so interpreted by Axis propa- 
gandists—as an attempt by this country to extend 
its influence over the British Commonwealth while 
Britain is engaged in a life-and-death struggle. But 
it need not cause concern in London unless the 
British themselves should fail to understand the 
changes that the war is making in the position both 
of the Dominions and of territories like India which 
have not yet achieved Dominion status. In spite of 
the contributions made by Canada, Australia and 
other Dominions to the war effort of the British 
Empire, no Dominion representatives have yet been 
invited to sit as equals in an Imperial War Cabinet 
in London. The appointment on March 19 of 
Richard G. Casey, Australian Minister in Washing- 
ton, as Minister of State in the Middle East 
and member of the British War Cabinet, may pre- 
sage a new policy, although this step does. not in 
itself set up a Commonwealth executive. But this 
appointment has been received with mixed feelin 
in the Dominion, where it is felt that Mr. Casey 
should not be removed from his Washington post 
at so crucial a moment in United States-Australian 
relations. 


In India, too, the problem of representation in 
the councils directing the war effort has reached a 
critical stage. On March 23 Sir Stafford Cripps ar- 
rived in India to present specific proposals of the 
British War Cabinet for a settlement of the politi- 
cal deadlock. Sir Stafford believes that an “ac- 
ceptable line of practical action” can be worked out 
for the introduction of self-government, so that full 
collaboration to resist aggression may be achieved. 
Representatives of the Indian National Congress, the 
Moslem League, the Chamber of Princes, and the 
Hindu Mahasabha are all eager to discuss the still 
undisclosed British proposals with Sir Stafford. With 











SS 





the Japanese already claiming control of the fate of 
India, it is possible that the British envoy will suc- 
ceed in negotiating a provisional agreement. 

If the British should take a realistic view of the 
revolutionary changes wrought by war in the fabric 
of the Empire, they might have an unrivaled op- 
portunity to unite the Commonwealth at this junc- 
ture by creating new channels, however informal, 
for political collaboration between London and the 
Dominions. In the long run, United States wartime 
participation in the defense of Australia and India 
should strengthen the Empire, instead of weakening 
it. Such participation would intermingle the inter- 
ests of the United States with those of the Com- 
monwealth as a whole. It would also bring home to 
Americans the varied problems faced by the British 
in their relations with far-flung and widely diversi- 
fied territories. Mutual comprehension would 


NEAR EAST ASTIR AS NAZI OFFENSIVE LOOMS 


With the advent of spring in Russia, Germany is 
believed to be planning large-scale offensive actions 
to gain the key positions and valuable economic re- 
sources needed for an Axis victory. The course of 
the major offensive will probably be dictated by 
Hitler’s estimate of the relative power of the Soviet 
Union. If he believes that the Red Army is sufficient- 
ly weakened by past campaigns, and that Russia’s 
industrial strength has been depleted by German 
conquests in the Ukraine, he may attempt a second 
direct attack to the east, with the Caucasus and Ural 
regions as the principal objectives. If, however, the 
Nazi High Command decides that the Russians’ 
striking power is insufficient to permit them to as- 
sume the offensive, it may leave a holding force on 
the eastern front and move southeastward toward 
the Suez Canal and the Persian Gulf. By obtaining 
control over those strategic positions, the Germans 
could open up direct communication with the Jap- 
anese through the Indian Ocean and cut off China 
and India from the other United Nations. 


BALKANS RESTIVE. Recent military and diplo- 
matic developments in the Balkan region suggest 
that Berlin is preparing actively for a spring cam- 
paign. Special measures have been taken to improve 
communications and prevent sabotage of railways 
in Greece and Yugoslavia. German troops are re- 
ported moving into Bulgaria and Rumanian ports 
on the Black Sea and onto the Axis-dominated 
islands of the Aegean, where barges are being as- 
sembled, presumably for an assault on Turkey. 

Meanwhile it is reported that both the Hungarian 
and Rumanian governments have been requested to 
place 300,000 additional troops at Germany’s dis- 
posal. On March 22 King Boris left Sofia on his 
way to Berlin, where it is expected that he will dis- 
cuss the terms on which Bulgaria will contribute its 


Page Two 








broaden the outlook of the United States, while jp, 
jecting new ideas and practices into Britain's rely 
tions with the Empire. 

IS THIS “UNION NOW’’? It would be a mix 
take, however, to jump to the conclusion that ¢ 
operation between this country and the British 
Commonwealth of Nations could stop at the estab 
lishment of “Union Now with Britain” or the Brit 
ish Empire. It is impossible, even if it should seem 
desirable, to exclude from the union that is in the 
making those nations—notably Russia and China 
which have greatly contributed to the Allied wa 
effort. The machinery of collaboration now bein 
forged in Washington, London, Moscow, Chung. 
king and Canberra will be the more effective, in wa 
and peace, the more it aims at inclusiveness, instead 
of exclusiveness. 





prom 
mach 


ment 
reach 
Now 


depai 


with 
sugg 
Thra 
the ¢ 
of G 
has 1 
cann 


4 mate 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


share of the man power now needed by the Nazis. 
Despite the fact that all three Balkan nations joined 
the Axis more or less willingly, Berlin is experienc 
ing great difficulty in enlisting them in the war ef. 
fort. The contingents sent from Hungary and Rw 
mania to fight in the anti-Communist ‘“‘crusade’ 
have suffered serious losses, greatly diminishing 
whatever popular approval may have existed for 
the campaign against Russia. 

Moreover, a recent exchange of recriminations be 
tween Budapest and Bucharest over the disputed 
border province of Transylvania demonstrates that 
even Hitler’s ““New Order’’ has failed to solve the 
territorial questions which have long _ troubled 
Balkan politics. When the Germans, on August 30, 
1940, requested Rumania to cede some 16,000 square 
miles of territory in Transylvania to Hungary, King 
Carol’s government had to accede. But in recent 
weeks, the undertone of dissent in Rumania has 
swelled into a roar of protest. On March 22 Michael 
Antonescu, brother of the Rumanian Prime Minister, 
bitterly attacked Hungary, saying that the “‘truce’ 
between the two nations would be broken if Buda 
pest persisted in mistreating the large Rumanian 
population in the ceded territory. Although Berlin 
is obviously embarrassed by this quarrel between 
two Axis partners, it appears to be veering toward 
support of Rumania, perhaps in return for a definite 





Enlarged... 


WAR MAPS 


Set of 12 © $1.00 


19” x 24” reproductions from revised WAR ATLAS showing 
combat areas, supply lines, economic and political line-up, 
etc. Discussion guide also included. 


Order from FPA, 22 East 38th St., New York 


deliv 
urge 
ingtc 
that 

shipt 


may 
the 


from 


the | 
the 

Allie 
the 

East 
with 
driv 
offer 
forc 


fall 
nific 
viev 
Jap: 
sent 
frot 
Hoy 
Pro 
this 
teri 
wit 
cee 
In 

abl 
sho 


the 




























































4 ———— 


ined 
ienc: 
r ef. 

Ru. 
ade" 
hing 

for 


s be 
uted 
that 


bled 
t 30, 
juare 
King 
ecent 

has 
chael 
ister, 
uce” 
5uda- 
nian 
erlin 
ween 
ward 
finite 


ing 
up, 




















OO —_—_ 


mise of additional troops to bolster the Wehr- 
macht’s striking power. 

TURKEY UNDER FIRE. The Nazi diplomatic 
campaign to cajole or intimidate the Turkish govern- 
ment has been carried on ever since the German tide 
reached ‘Turkey's borders in the spring of 1941. 
Now it appears to be entering a new phase with the 
departure from Ankara, on March 19, of the Ger- 
man Ambassador, Franz von Papen, for consultation 
with the Fuhrer. Comments in the German press 
suggest that Hitler will offer the Turks territories in 
Thrace, Syria and Iraq which formerly belonged to 
the Ottoman Empire, in return for the free passage 
of German forces through Turkey. While Ankara 
has not hitherto yielded to Nazi blandishments, it 
cannot resist Nazi pressure indefinitely unless war 


} material and supplies promised by the Allies are 


delivered in greater volume than heretofore. The 
urgency of Turkey’s needs was recognized in Wash- 
ington by Sumner Welles, who declared on March 18 
that everything possible was being done to expedite 
shipments of lend-lease aid to Turkey. 

Instead of driving through Anatolia, the Axis 
may decide to by-pass Turkey entirely and strike at 
the British island of Cyprus and thence at Syria 
from bases on Crete and the Italian Dodecanese. 
The British bombardment on March 15 of Rhodes, 
the principal port in the Dodecanese, coupled with 
the rapid fortification of Cyprus, indicate that the 
Allied High Command is aware of this menace. At 
the same time, the British have built up a Near 
Eastern force of 750,000 men fairly well supplied 
with modern arms and airplanes to meet a German 
drive on Syria or a possible resumption of the Nazi 
offensive in Libya. The requirements of the Allied 
forces in Southeast Asia and the shipping shortage 


Page Three 








have probably prevented any significant reinforce- 
ments in recent months. For some time to come, 
therefore, the Cairo headquarters will probably be 
compelled to remain on the defensive. 


THE NEAR EAST UNDECIDED. Behind the 
battle fronts, British diplomats are keeping close 
watch on the state of public opinion among the 
native populations of the region. Among the factors 
influencing them, the relative strength of the op- 
posing powers is of great importance. The incon- 
clusive British offensives in Libya and the recent 
reverses of the Allies in the Pacific have undoubt- 
edly led the Arabs to veer toward the Axis. The 
problem of Jewish and Arab rivalry in Palestine 
continues to exacerbate Arab opinion. The Zionists 
have recently strengthened their demands for a sep- 
arate Jewish Army, an increase of Jewish immigra- 
tion into Palestine, and the pledge of a Jewish com- 
monwealth after the war. But London has refused to 
alter the status quo in Palestine, in deference to Arab 
sentiment throughout the Near and Middle East. 

Beside the 15,000 Jews serving in British units in 
the Near East, the Allies receive military assistance 
only from a small Arab Legion in Palestine and 
from Senussi tribesmen in Libya. While it can 
scarcely be hoped that many Near Eastern inhabi- 
tants will take up arms in the Allied cause, it is 
important that the populations of the area should 
not embarrass the United Nations’ war effort. If the 
war comes closer to the Near East, claims for con- 
cessions from the Western powers will undoubtedly 
be raised, as was the case in India. The Allies must 
be prepared either to recognize these claims or to 
display sufficient military strength to overawe the 
dissident elements. An intermediate policy will lead 


to serious difficulties. Louis E. FRECHTLING 


MADAGASCAR IN INDIAN OCEAN STRATEGY 


The situation created in the Indian Ocean by the 
fall of Singapore has considerably increased the sig- 
nificance of Madagascar from a strategic point of 
view. If this French island were used as a base for 
Japanese submarines and bombers, it would repre- 
sent a severe threat to the all-important supply route 
from Europe and America around the Cape of Good 
Hope to Egypt, India, Iran, Soviet Russia and China. 
Provided that the United Nations want to keep 
this route open for the shipment of troops and ma- 
terial, they cannot let Japan occupy Madagascar, 
with or without the consent of Vichy. Japan suc- 
ceeded, in 1940, in occupying French Indo-China. 
In doing so, it gained a base from which it was 
able to launch the attack on Singapore. If Japan 
Should repeat this procedure in Madagascar, it 
would obtain a new foothold from which to assail 
the Cape Town route of American and British con- 





voys and eventually to invade Africa. 

The first indication that Japan had asked the 
Vichy government for bases on Madagascar reached 
the United States on February 10, 1942 from Free 
French quarters in London. During the following 
weeks, dispatches from various sources purported 
to show that a Japanese military, naval and air 
mission had been making surveys for naval and air 
bases on Madagascar. According to one of these 
sources, the Japanese newspaper Yomiuri quoted 
Jacques Benoist-Mechin, Vichy’s Vice Minister of 
State, as having said that, “if necessary,” France 
might consent to a landing of Japanese troops at 
Madagascar. Vichy’s reaction to these reports has 
been a strenuous denial that a Japanese mission has 
arrived on the island. The Pétain government's dis- 
claimer was confirmed by a report of the American 





Consul in Madagascar, published on March 21, that 














there are only two Japanese nationals there. Infor- 
mation from other sources suggests that within re- 
cent months many German have been sent 
to Madagascar to cooperate with the French authori- 
ties. No official denial of the presence of German 
technicians has yet been made. 


MADAGASCAR A DEFENSELESS PRIZE. Ex- 
cept for a small naval base at Diego Suarez, Mada- 
gascar is practically undefended. On February 18, 
however, the French Ambassador at Washington, 
M. Henry-Haye, declared that France had decided 
to protect the island against any incursions, and on 
March 10 unconfirmed information coming from 
Turkey disclosed that six light naval units of the 
Vichy French fleet had been dispatched from Dakar 
to Madagascar. But there is little that Vichy France 
can do to oppose an invasion. Madagascar’s only 
army is a garrison of native soldiers, amounting to 
about 10,000 men under the command of a handful 
of French officers. To transport either personnel or 
supplies to the island would be extremely difficult. 

With an area of 241,000 square miles, Madagas- 
car is the fourth largest island in the world. It lies 
only 250 miles from the East African coast. The 
population is estimated at about 3,621,000, of whom 
some 18,000 are French—largely sympathetic to 
General de Gaulle— and the remainder of Mela- 
nesian and Polynesian stock. The island has three 
good harbors which have been modernized in the 
last ten years: Diego Suarez, the best, in the north; 
Tamatave, on the east coast; and Tuléar, on the 
west. A Japanese fleet, well protected in these har- 


Page Four 

















F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: SPOTLIGHT ON AUSTRALIA 
Speaker: William P. Maddox 
Date: Sunday, March 29 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 

For station, please consult your local newspaper 

















bors, could block the Mozambique channel anf 
harass the eastern sea route to India. Madagascy 
might also serve as a base for the occupation of 
Portuguese Mozambique and its important port of 
Beira, which controls the export of the precioy 
copper and chrome ore of British Rhodesia. Ik 
seizure would permit the Japanese to bomb th 
coastal cities of South Africa, from Durban to Cape 
Town, as well as the main port of British Kenya 
Mombassa, further to the north. The immediate ecg 
nomic potentialities of the island are small, by 
coffee and other tropical foodstuffs, as well as som 
minerals, notably graphite, are exported. 

Since France can hardly defend this vitally im 

rtant position alone, a preventive occupation by 
Allied forces may become necessary. In a sense 
Madagascar plays in the Indian Ocean the part thal 
Iceland plays in the North Atlantic. The strategi 
requirements of the Allies may demand an occupa 
tion by Free French forces, temporarily supported “| 
South African troops. The lesson learned in the cas 
of Indo-China gives the United Nations a vitd 
interest in forestalling any possible incursion by the 
Japanese. 





VoL. - 
—_ 


W 


detail 
prese 
close 
right 
ment: 
settin 
cific. 

cessa' 
chose 
maki 
tation 


will 
ERNEST S. HEDIGER § to ¢h 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf popu 


Turkey, by Emil Lengyel. New York, Random House, 1941. 
$3.75 
A popular history of the Turks from their early be- 
ginnings on the plains of Central Asia to the testing of the 
Turkish Republic in the second World War. While the 
book is not always accurate or profound, the reader will 
gain a general knowledge of an interesting people. 


Athene Palace, by R. G. Waldeck. New York, McBride, 
1942. $2.75 
Cleverly written tale of what a shrewd observer in 
Bucharest’s famed hotel found out about Nazi infiltration in 
Rumania. 


Economic Warfare, 1939-1940. by Paul Einzig. New York, 
Maemillan, 1941. $1.75 
A popular writer on economic subjects demonstrates 
that the economic warfare waged by both Britain and 
Germany fell far short of the anticipated objectives. 


Honorable Enemy, by Ernest O. Hauser. New York, Duell, 
Sloan and Pearce, 1941. $2.50 
An interesting analysis of the Japanese people, chiefly 


from a psychological point of view, by a keen observer of 
the difference between Eastern and Western ways of life. 


The Potsdam Fiihrer, by Robert Ergang. New York, CG Britis 
lumbia University Press, 1941. $3.00 impl 
An excellent biography of King Frederick William }f [pdj- 

the founder of Prussian militarism. Of timely interest be 

cause the Nazis draw much of their inspiration from thi 

Potsdam Fihrer, as well as his son, Frederick the Great. 


From the Land of Silent People, by Robert St. John. Net 

York, Doubleday, 1942. $3.00 

An extraordinarily gripping and vivid account of a co 
respondent’s experiences during the Axis conquest @ 
Yugoslavia, Greece and Crete. Using unadorned narration 
as his tool, Mr. St. John sharply etches the horror aml 
pathos of a Blitz campaign against unprepared peoplé 
and armies, and highlights the insufficiency of the Allie 
defense. 


A History of Ukraine, by Michael Hrushevsky. Nef 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1941. $4.00 
A scholarly work by the leading Ukrainian historiat 

an advocate of Ukrainian independence. Although it ené 

with the year 1918, a chapter covering recent deve 

ments up to the fall of 1940 has been added by Prof. 0. 

Frederiksen. 


ince 
cons! 
form 
Seco: 
treat 
cove 
fer 
treat 
and 
restr 
decic 
ber | 

A 
Crip 
of I, 



















FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 23, Marcu 27, 1942. 


spor 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National reso 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Wiitiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Lam 


Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editor; Davy H. Poppur, Associate Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New Yor Indi 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Be 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Staff 
be a 








