"aw 


t of 
hat 
ent 
her 
rks 
unt 
ans 


‘ing 
ade 
vor- 
has 
ere 
im- 
aich 
r as 
Ave 
ary 
and 
1 of 
Ssi- 
“ials 
the 
ron, 
for 
do- 
n to 


lists 
itia- 


> is 
azis. 
med 
ces, 
sued 
debt 
s of 
his 
een 
tical 

in- 
pro- 


now 
ht’s 
trict 
ystly 


ap- 
res- 
red. 


JE 


ational 
Editor. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





scr £0 Yd, Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879, 








PERIODICAL ROOM 
GENERAL LIBRARY 








Vou. XVI, No. 48 SEPTEMBER 24, 1937 


———— 


TRADE RIVALRIES IN LATIN AMERICA 
by Howard J. Trueblood 


Despite the apparent success of British and German trade 
policies in Latin America, long-term factors seem to be 
working in favor of the United States. This report describes 
the competition of Germany, Great Britain, Japan and the 
United States for control of Latin-American markets. 





September 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 


UNIV. OF MICH. 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 











CHINA URGES LEAGUE 


TO CONDEMN JAPAN 





TRIKING from the air at Nanking even before 
the expiration of its warning to foreign diplo- 
mats to leave by September 21, Japan appeared 
ready to risk new incidents involving third states 
in its determination to bomb the Chinese govern- 
ment out of its capital. The United States repre- 
sentatives, under orders to avoid undue hazards, 
left the city, but officials of other nations declared 
they would remain. Meanwhile, both combatants 
and de facto neutrals concerned in the Sino-Jap- 
anese conflict explored the anomalies accompany- 
ing the conduct of undeclared and unrecognized 
warfare on a wide scale. 


At Geneva the Chinese government on Septem- 
ber 13 appealed to the League to take appropriate 
action against Japan under Articles X and XI 
and, for the first time, Article XVII of the Cove- 
nant. The first two, calling for measures of un- 
specified nature to protect member states against 
aggression and safeguard peace, are sufficiently 
vague not to embarrass the League. Article XVII, 
however, provides that if a state which does not 
belong to the League refuses an invitation to as- 
sume the obligations of membership for considera- 
tion of the dispute, and resorts to war against a 
member state, the Covenant’s provisions for the 
imposition of sanctions “shall be applicable.” 


In view of Japan’s announced intention to ig- 
nore outside intervention, it was generally ex- 
pected that the League would be loath to proceed 
under Article XVII, especially because the topic of 
Sanctions has been avoided in Geneva since the 
Ethiopian fiasco. The Chinese delegation, how- 
ever, showed no inclination to embarrass the 
League by requesting any steps under this ar- 
ticle. Instead, Dr. Wellington Koo, chief Chinese 
delegate, suggested in the Assembly on Septem- 
ber 15 that the League’s advisory committee on 
the Sino-Japanese conflict, set up early in 1933 
to consider the Manchurian conflict, be convoked 
to deal with the situation. At that time the United 


States sat as an observer in this body—which re- 
mained inactive after a subcommittee had recom- 
mended measures for implementing the non- 
recognition of Manchoukuo—and on September 20 
Washington announced that it would resume lim- 
ited cooperation in the committee’s deliberations. 


Until Japan formally “resorts to war,” resusci- 
tation of the advisory committee appears to offer 
the best prospect for solving the knotty problem 
of observing the letter of the League Covenant 
without taking drastic steps at an inopportune 
moment. It is even conceivable that the committee 
may recommend an embargo on the shipment of 
arms or the extension of financial aid to Japan 
—a measure which would dovetail nicely with full 
application of the American Neutrality Act. By 
invoking Article XVII but not pressing for its 
application, moreover, China is in a position to 
employ the League as a restraining influence on 
Japan. Should Tokyo now extend its blockade to 
non-Chinese vessels transporting munitions or 
other vital war materials to China—a move pre- 
sumably denoting the existence of a state of war 
de jure—the League would at once be compelled 
to face the problem of applying sanctions. 


In view of British and American acquiescence 
in the measures already taken, however, Japan 
would have little to gain by resort to a full-fledged 
war blockade. President Roosevelt, unwilling to 
run the risk of an incident, announced on Septem- 
ber 14 that American government-owned vessels 
would not be permitted to carry armaments to 
China or Japan, and that privately owned Ameri- 
can vessels would do so at their own risk. By 
this move the President, in effect, partially ap- 
plied the Neutrality Act, while avoiding the 
declaration that a state of war exists. On Sep- 
tember 15 London underwriters suspended stand- 
ard insurance rates on munitions and oil ship- 
ments to China and Japan. These measures have 
temporarily disorganized Chinese maritime trade 








HT] 
t 
i 
a 
, 


= 


= = 


<a 








= Page Two 


and led to Chinese representations in Washing- 
ton on September 17 and 18. British shipping 
off the China coast had previously been directed 
to permit examination of papers by Japanese 
naval officers if British authorities are not avail- 
able to perform the task. Tokyo officials, mean- 
while, took a first step in what was regarded as a 
gradual tightening of the blockade by warning the 
powers that Chinese vessels transferred to foreign 
registry will not be recognized as foreign ships. 


As China begins to feel the effect of the block- 
ade, it is for the first time meeting the full impact 
of the Japanese army’s attack. After their stub- 
born stand at Shanghai, Chinese forces on Sep- 
tember 13 began a short strategic retreat to pre- 
pared positions beyond the reach of enemy naval 
guns. Mobile warfare continued in the north, 
with Japanese columns moving south and west 
along railway arteries. These forces were ap- 
proaching strong Chinese positions before Yen- 
men pass, the gateway to rich Shansi province, 
and Paoting on the Peiping-Hankow railway. 
Some military observers questioned the wisdom of 
an entrenched Chinese resistance of the type evi- 
dently planned, holding that Nanking’s purpose 
would be better served by guerrilla warfare along 
lengthy communication lines. Powerful support 
would be provided in such warfare by the 100,000 
seasoned Chinese Communist troops, who on Sep- 
tember 10 formally joined the Nanking govern- 
ment armies and prepared to meet the Japanese in 


Suiyuan. DAvip H. PopPEer 


ITALY STALLS ON NYON AGREEMENT 


The Nyon anti-submarine agreement signed on 
September 14, and supplemented three days later 
by an accord extending its provisions to attacks 
on non-Spanish merchant ships by warships and 
aircraft, was denounced in Italy as a high-handed 
attempt to establish Franco-British hegemony in 
a sea regarded by Italians as Mare Nostrum. Ina 
note of September 14, drafted after consultation 
with the German Foreign Office, the Italian gov- 
ernment refused to adhere to the Nyon agreement 
—which had reserved the Tyrrhenian and Adri- 
atic seas for patrolling by Italy—unless it was 
invited to participate in the Mediterranean patrol 
on terms of “absolute equality” with Britain and 
France. The Italian press indicated that failure 
to meet this demand might result in collapse of 
the negotiations for an Italo-British settlement 
scheduled to begin in October. Much was also 
made in Rome of alleged differences between 
Prime Minister Chamberlain, who has urged 
reconciliation with Italy, and Foreign Minister 
Eden, whose activities on behalf of League sanc- 








tions during the Ethiopian crisis have stamped 
him as Italy’s “public enemy No. 1.” 


Fearing that Italy’s demand for “absolute equal. 
ity” was intended to reopen the whole question of 
action against “pirate” submarines, Britain ang 
France, while leaving the way open for Italian 
adherence, proceeded without delay to carry out 
the terms of the Nyon agreement. On Septem. 
ber 17 they abandoned the international patro| 
of Spanish coasts, from which Germany and Italy 
had already withdrawn in June, following an at. 
tack on the German cruiser Leipzig by an uniden. 
tified submarine. Ships assigned to Spanish 
waters have now been diverted to the Mediter. 
ranean patrol, in the organization of which France 
and Britain have displayed a degree of collabora. 


tion unknown since the World War—a fact which 
has not escaped the attention of Fascist dictator. 
ships. 

Nor have the two Western democracies bee 


content to stop at these measures. In a speech 
to the League Assembly on September 18 MW, 
Delbos, French Foreign Minister, declared that, 
should Italy answer the Nyon agreement by send. 
ing either arms or reinforcements to Genera 
Franco, France would be relieved of its non-inter. 
vention obligations. This was interpreted as 4 
warning that the Chautemps cabinet might re 
open the Franco-Spanish frontier, and permit the 
passage of arms destined for the Valencia gov- 
ernment. On the same day Sefior Negrin, Valen. 
cia Premier, addressing the Assembly, demanded 
that Valencia should once more enjoy the right to 
acquire all the war material it may consider neces- 
sary; that non-Spanish combatants be withdrawn 
from Spanish territory; and that security mea 
sures adopted in the Mediterranean be extended 
to Loyalist shipping, with the participation of the 
Valencia government, which was not invited te 


the Nyon conference. On September 20, however, 
the Assembly dealt a heavy blow to Spain by fail 
ing to re-elect it to a semi-permanent seat on the 
Council. 

The effect these developments may have on 
Italy’s future course is still uncertain. Reports ol 


Count Ciano’s conversation on September 19 with 
the British and French chargés d’affaires in 
Rome, however, would indicate that Italy is in 
clined to be conciliatory, provided its face is saved 
by a Franco-British invitation to participate in 
the Mediterranean patrol. Now that the democ 
racies have shown at Nyon that they are not, in 
Dr. Goebbels’ flattering phrase, “stupid cows go 
ing to the slaughter-house,” they can afford to aid 
this process of face-saving, on condition that Italy 
does its part in relieving European tension. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 48, SepTemper 24, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. ° 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgstig Busi, President; EstHerR G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Nationa 








FC 


An 


\z| 


l| 





