in co. 
y field 
trolled 
redited) 
with 4 
mittee 
1 Pow. 
nN neu 
‘or the 
© were! 
> inter- 


Decem| 


e forn| 
e head! 
elds of 
multi’ 
direct| 
may be! 
e East,| 
boards| 
supply 


nda 


$0 far! 
ermits.| 
r lesser 
ymmon 
of co 
results 

of all) 
aterial 
» Allies} 
willing| 
ced, of 
nation 


LING 


— Wi 
> 


e U * De 
= . 
C= : tes 

taVOrSity opi : “-" 


Aan Arbor, toch. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vout. XXI, No. 13 


JANUARY 16, 1942 


NEW WAR PROGRAM CALLS FOR UNIFIED DIRECTION AND PLANNING 


HE war production program outlined by the 

President in his message to Congress on January 6 
was apparently designed both to impress the Axis 

wers with the great strength that may ultimately 
be marshaled against them, and to urge the American 
people to mobilize all their resources for the achieve- 
ment of goals which have hitherto been considered 
virtually impossible of attainment. The President 
called for the manufacture of 60,000 aircraft in 
1942, as compared with the present production rate 
of about 30,000 a year, and a total output of 125,000 
planes in 1943—a figure 75,000 in excess of the 
previously fixed maximum. The production of tanks, 
which was scheduled to reach only 800 a month at 
the beginning and 2,800 at the end of 1942, must 
now be raised to 45,000 in the present year and 
75,000 in 1943. New goals for the output of anti- 
aircraft guns are 20,000 and 35,000 for 1942 and 
1943; and for the merchant shipbuilding program, 
8,000,000 and 10,000,000 tons, respectively. The 
Maritime Commission itself had envisaged the con- 
struction of only 13,000,000 tons of shipping in the 
next two years. 

In his budget message of January 7, the President 
revealed that this gigantic war effort will entail an 
outlay of nearly $53 billion in the year ending June 
30, 1943, as against a total of only about $24 billion 
in the current fiscal year. It will necessitate raising 
defense expenditure from the total of almost $2 
billion a month in December 1941 (20 per cent of 
national income) to over $5 billion a month during 
1942-43 (50 per cent of anticipated national income). 


PRODUCTION PLANNING. While the Presi- 
dent’s new objectives have been universally acclaimed 
as feasible, the nation must frankly understand the 
obstacles to their attainment. The revised produc- 
tion schedules which defense officials have been busily 
drawi ing up since early December did not envisage 


the goals now set by Mr. Roosevelt. A fresh start 
must be made. The first prerequisite is a drastic shake- 
up in the organization and direction of the war pro- 
duction program. Responsibility for the control and 
planning of production must be centralized in a single 
agency. Hitherto the whole program has been hand- 
icapped by lack of clear-cut demarcation in the 
jurisdiction and authority of SPAB, OPM, RFC, the 
Maritime Commission and the War and Navy De- 
partments. The first three are supposed to allocate 
the nation’s resources, plan procurement and produc- 
tion, and finance the construction of new plants and 
the acquisition of raw materials. Relations between 
the SPAB and OPM are obscure, however, and the 
RFC, which ought to be definitely under the juris- 
diction of OPM or SPAB, is a completely indepen- 
dent organization. The Maritime Commission and 
the Army and Navy conclude all defense contracts, 
and may or may not follow the directives laid down 
by OPM in the procurement of war supplies. It seems 
essential to create a single department of supply 
which will definitely coordinate production planning 
and contracting, and can negotiate on questions of 
joint supply with Britain and the other allies. 


One of the most constructive plans for industrial 
mobilization has been advanced in a report pub- 
lished on December 19 by a Congressional Committee 
under the chairmanship of Representative John H. 
Tolan. It called for the organization of a single 
civilian board which would examine *he schedules 
of military requirements submitted by the Army, 
Navy, Maritime Commission and lend-lease authori- 
ties; draw up the necessary production programs and 
let the contracts; maintain a technical division to keep 
a complete inventory of industrial facilities, raw ma- 
terials and labor supply, and check the progress of 
war work; and set up regional offices to carry out the 
board’s policies and insure full participation of small 
concerns in war production. 


FULL UTILIZATION OF INDUSTRY. The 
second prerequisite for the achievement of the Presi- 

dent’s program is bold action in converting the coun- 
-.try’s civilian industries to the manufacture of 
munitions. Until a few months ago defense officials 
were relying primarily on new plants to produce 
war material. Today we can no longer afford to wait 
until additional factories are built. We must adapt 
the equipment of industries which have been turn- 
ing out durable consumers’ goods to the production 
of planes, tanks, artillery and their component parts. 
In a desire to maintain ‘“‘business as usual,” many 
manufacturers have undoubtedly underestimated the 
extent to which their machinery can be utilized for 
this purpose. While spokesmen for the automobile 
industry have steadfastly asserted that only about 
15 per cent of its facilities could be used for war 
production, many independent engineers and such 
union officials as Walter P. Reuther have claimed 
that as much as 50 to 80 per cent could be employed. 


Now that passenger-car production must cease 
completely, plans for large-scale conversion of the 
automobile industry are finally going ahead. Follow- 
ing a conference with management and labor in 
Washington last week, OPM announced on January 
11 the appointment of a committee representing 
organized labor and manufacturers which will 
“assist” in developing plans for the utilization of 
plant, machinery and labor previously employed in 
the making of cars. The OPM has so far ignored 
proposals of the CIO which envisage pooling the 


THE DUTCH EAST INDIES UNDER FIRE 


Based on the excellent harbor facilities of Davao, 
in southern Mindanao, Japanese military, naval and 
air forces have begun the second month of the war 
with their first large-scale invasion of Netherlands 
Indies territory. At Tarakan, important island oil- 
producing center on the northeast coast of Dutch 
Borneo, Japanese forces pushed ashore from trans- 
ports supported by a naval flotilla which included at 
least one cruiser. In northern Celebes three landings, 
partly aided by parachute troops, were effected at the 
tip of the narrow Minahassa arm of the island. Four 
Japanese transports and two cruisers suffered direct 
hits from Allied bombers, but the landings were 
apparently completed in all cases and these new 
positions will undoubtedly be consolidated for a con- 


The United States at War 
January 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports + 25c per copy 


A survey of the strategic, political and economic problems 
confronting the U.S., jointly prepared by members of the 
Research Staff, which weighs the effect that this country’s 
participation may have on the outcome of the war. 


[ForEIGN Po.icy Reports are published on the 1st and 15th 
of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to FPA members $3.] 


Page Two 


——= | — 


es 


production facilities of each industry under the direg.| refining F 
tion of joint labor-management councils. Manage. will shar] 
ment has rejected all such suggestions as involving troleun 
“socialization”; yet if industry-wide “pooling” of} tain. Jap 
tools, machinery, labor and managerial skill can a¢.| to make 
celerate the war effort, the mere desire to retain yp.| secondary 
trammeled private management and ownership) trol and 
should not be allowed to stand in the way. The polj.| become 
cies of both management and labor must be judged Strates 
today only on the basis of their contribution toward| than the 
a greater war effort. of Japan 
Conversion of existing factories must in many cases} Full pos 
be supplemented by construction of new machinery} Japanese 
and plants. For example, the scheduled output of directly « 
aluminum, which has been geared to that of aircraft, Indian d 
will now again have to be enormously expanded. The} Dutch n 
same is true of many other raw materials. The strain | operatio: 
on the supply of some scarce materials could, how.) western 
ever, be eased, provided the armed services revise} in on Si 
their specifications. Germany, for instance, has dem. strategy, 
onstrated that it could attain a large output of muni-| the incr’ 
tions with supplies of non-ferrous metals which have} sected a, 


been far smaller than ours. The President's arms pro-| and Sin; 
gram will also require more efficient utilization of} THE 
the labor supply, involving a rapid extension of train-} gouthea 
ing and possibly the institution of priorities for} pase of 
skilled workmen. The country can meet Mr. Roose-} vital art 
velt’s goals, but only if it insists on thorough reorgani-} ments. 

zation of the agencies directing the program and is) troops ¥ 
prepared to accept drastic changes in habits of pro-| approxi 
duction and consumption. Joun C. pEWILDE 


force, € 
| serving 


| the was 
tinued drive south toward the vital centers of the} 20,000, 


East Indies. Against such a drive the Netherlands | gumbet 
Indies at the outset of the war mustered an army of | combat 
125,000 trained troops, with an air force of possibly | stricted 
750 planes. As Allied naval and air forces are in- 
creasingly concentrated in this area, however, it may 
be expected that the local Dutch defenses will be| Wit 
strongly reinforced before the Japanese drive assumes | Russiat 
full momentum. the So 
at leas 
AIMS OF NEW DRIVE. Occupation of Tarakan | for a C 
has placed a second large oil-producing center of | Red A 
Borneo under Japanese control. On the west coast, | sectors 
Sarawak and Brunei were seized in December; while | Sevast: 
Balikpapan, the third major Borneo oil region, lies | portio 
at the middle of Macassar Strait directly in the path | the ce 
of the new drive. These three Borneo areas produced | Lyudis 
nearly 20,000,000 barrels of crude oil in 1940, of} tured. 
somewhat less than a third of the total East Indian } prize; 
production of 68,000,000 barrels which is derived ; lose, 2 
mainly from Sumatra and Java. Plants at Balikpapan, |} freed 
with a daily capacity of 35,000 barrels, deliver about} forcer 
one-fourth of the refining output of all installa-) equal 
tions in the East Indies. Destruction of oil wells and} of the 


' 
Page Th 
—) = age Tree Vi 
direc.} refining plants, which is apparently being carried out, Near East or unless part of the home defense army, j 
anage.| will sharply reduce the amount of crude and refined totaling 250,000 men enlisted for home service, can H 
olving troleum which the Japanese will immediately ob- be sent overseas. ( 
g” of | tain. Japan's oil reserve, however, is sufficiently large The Australian munitions industry has become a Ga 
an ac.| to make the rapid acquisition of new supplies a far more important factor in the present struggle than S 
in up.| secondary consideration for the present, although con- it was in 1914-18. Since May 1940 Australia’s muni- i 
ership trol and exploitation of the East Indian wells would tions workers have increased from 5,000 to 200,000, 4 
e polj.| become an imperative necessity in a long war. and the output of both heavy and light munitions has i 
udged| Strategic considerations obviously bulk far larger vastly expanded. Within three years, Australia has i 
oward| than the economic so far as the immediate objectives developed a rapidly growing airplane industry which | 
of Japan's drive into the East Indies are concerned. has already turned out more than 1,000 planes. Cur- 
y cases} Full possession of Borneo and Celebes would carry rent production of about 100 planes a moxth, includ- 
hinery| Japanese forces to the narrow waters of the Java Sea, ing trainers and bombers, will probably be doubled 
Sut of} directly opposite Java itself—vital center of the East in another year. A considerable shipbuilding program, 
rcraft. | Indian defense system. It would threaten the main embracing cruisers, destroyers and merchant ships, is 
1. The} Dutch naval base at Surabaya and limit Allied fleet being completed, and Australian factories have un- 
strain} opetations in the Java Sea, thus strengthening the dertaken to equip a whole armored division at a cost 
-how-| western arm of the Japanese pincers which is closing of $100,000,000. 
revise} in on Singapore. In the larger picture of Far Eastern With the outbreak of war in the Pacific, moreover, 
; dem-| strategy, an even more significant result would be Australia has become a key area on the American 
muni-| the increased Japanese pressure which could be di- supply route to Southeast Asia. While the naval and 
1 have! rected against the American supply route to Batavia air base of Port Darwin, on the northern tip of 
1s pro-| and Singapore via Australia and the South Pacific. Australia, is not capable of handling battleships, it 
ion of THE AUSTRALIAN BASE. In the struggle for s a strategically located link in the chain of South 
‘train-} southeast Asia, Australia constitutes an important Pacific communications. A rail-and-road route through 
eS fot} base of supply, both for men and munitions, and a the heart of Australia joins Port Darwin with Sydney, 
Roose: vital artery of communications for Allied reinforce- Melbourne, and Adelaide, on the opposite side of 
rgani-! ments. The Australian Imperial Force, comprising the continent. American supply vessels, passing south 
and is troops which have enlisted for overseas service, totals through Samoa and the Fiji Islands, can approach 
f pro- approximately 170,000. Virtually the whole of this Port Darwin along the Australian coast, protected by 
ILDE | force, except for a few units in Malaya, was already the Great Barrier Reef, and then move westward via 
serving in European and Near Eastern sectors when the chain of East Indian islands to Batavia and the 
| the war began in the Pacific. Naval personnel totals South China Sea. The last link in this chain, from 
of the | 20,000, and there are 60,000 in the air force. The Port Darwin to Batavia, will be increasingly threat- 
tlands | pumber of Australian troops available for immediate ened should the Japanese forces succeed in establish- 
‘my of | combat service in Southeast Asia is therefore re- ing control over the southern portions of Borneo and 
ossibly | stricted, unless some divisions are returned from the the Celebes. T. A. Bisson 
are in- | 
it may. EUROPE RESTIVE AS GERMANY FALTERS 
vill be| With the Nazi armies still unable to halt the IS GERMANY WEAKENING? These military 
ssumes | Russians on a defensive line, the heavy pressure of events coincide with a constant stream of reports from 
| the Soviet winter offensive against the Reich seems many points in Europe indicating that the Reich is 
| at least temporarily to have dislocated Hitler’s plans undergoing a serious internal crisis. Rumors of addi- 
arakan | fora German-dominated Europe. In recent weeks the tional changes in the German military command have 
ter of | Red Army's principal gains have taken place in two now been added to previous advices of great priva- 
coast, | sectors. In the first, the Crimean front, the siege of tion and ebbing morale as news from the Russian 
, while | Sevastopol has now been lifted and the southern front filters back into the country. Nazi news organs 
mn, lies | portion of the peninsula reconquered. In the second, themselves are stressing the seriousness of the military 
e path | the central war zone west of Moscow, the town of situation; and official sources have gone to great 
oduced | Lyudinovo on the Rzhev-Bryansk railway was recap- lengths to deny tales of incipient internal revolution. 
40, of} tured on January 11. The railroad is a most valuable To many obsérvers these developments seem in the 
Indian} prize; with interruption of its traffic, the Germans mass suspiciously like a clever attempt to lull the 
lerived ; lose, and the Russians may be about to gain, relative Allies into a state of complacency while the Germans, 
papan,} freedom of north-south movement for lateral rein- slowly yielding in the East, prepare for spring offen- 
+ about | forcement of the long Russian front—a freedom un- sives on as yet undisclosed fronts. 
astalla-} equalled anywhere east of the Dnieper, far to the rear Among the neutral and subjugated peoples of 
lls and} of the German lines at the present time. Europe, however, there are signs of greater restive- 


ness than at any time since the fall of France. Indi- 
cations of German difficulties appear with increasing 
frequency. In the last issue of the magazine Das Reich, 
for example, Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goeb- 
bels has written a threatening denunciation of Sweden 
and Switzerland because of their neutrality and al- 
leged pro-Bolshevik political tendency. To ascribe 
such a tendency to these states is obviously nothing 
more than to trump up a pretext for browbeating 
them, since the governments of both have been gen- 
erally motivated by fear of the Soviet Union and its 
ideology for over twenty years. A press campaign of 
this type shows either that the Reich is increasing 
its demands on the neutrals, or that they are begin- 
ning to assume a more independent position. 


In the case of Sweden, Dr. Goebbels’ displeasure 
may have been caused by widespread rumors that 
Stockholm has assumed the role of mediator between 
Finland and the Soviet Union. While the Finns are 
still officially allies of Germany, with German troops 
using their territory as a base of operations against 
Russia, a strong group of Social Democratic and 
trade union leaders is openly urging the conclusion 
of an armistice. From one point of view there are 
most compelling reasons for Finland’s withdrawal 
from the war. The food situation is desperate; a 
portion of the population is literally on the verge 
of starvation. The Russian successes to the south, 
moreover, have paved the way for offensive action 
against the Finnish troops. In fact, the Berlin radio 
announced on January 10 that the Red Army had 
initiated a counter-attack on the extreme northern 
Murmansk front. Since Field Marshal Mannerheim 
announced on November 29 that Finland’s strategic 
goal would soon be reached, and since Finnish troops 
have not been especially active in recent weeks, it 
should be possible to establish a temporary line of 
demarcation. Such a line might be based on present 
military positions, or the border as it was before the 
Russian attack of November 30, 1939, leaving the 
U.S.S.R. in control of the Murmansk railway. 


Assuming that the German forces in Finland were 
withdrawn or neutralized, a truce or a peace settle- 
ment would be of benefit to the Soviet military, who 
would be free to shift their units to the Leningrad 
front. The Finnish leaders, however, are confronted 
with a serious dilemma. If they continue the war, 
they do so over the opposition of a large section of 
their public, not to speak of the twenty-six United 
Nations. On the other hand, so great is their legacy 
of distrust for the Sdviet Union that they fear either 


Page Four 


———__, 
—— 
—, 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: CHINA’S ROLE IN THE FAR 
EASTERN WAR 


Speaker: Robert W. Barnett 
Date: Sunday, January 18 
Time; 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 


a Soviet occupation or the establishment of a puppet 
pro-Russian government if the Finns lay down their 
arms. For some of them, German domination is stil} 
preferable to this eventuality. Nor do they believe 
that, in view of present transportation difficulties, any 
power but Germany will be in a position to supply 
the country with foodstuffs. With British and Ameri 
can assistance, it might be possible to offer the Finns 
suitable guarantees on both points. 


Vou. XX: 
a 


’ 


A sense of disquiet and impending crisis is also an 
evident in France, where the New Year's message of rc 
Marshal Henri Pétain released a flood of anti-Vichy = 
invective in the German-controlled Paris press. In a) "“ e : 
pathetic appeal for unity at home and magnanimit Rio de J 
from the Nazis, the Marshal described as ‘‘deserter hate de 
all those who in the press as well as on the air, abroad — 
as well as in France, resort to abject tasks.’ Apparent which . 
ly the blow struck home. Paris condemned opponents the ad 
of collaboration and blamed the influence of United) M8 
States Ambassador William D. Leahy for the ney} ©8t@!™ 
crisis. Meanwhile, a recrudescence of sporadic vie isphere 
lence was highlighted, in the night of January 4-5) U™8¥ 
by the murder of Yves Paringaux, a high official is}  Y4*Y’ 
the Vichy Ministry of the Interior responsible for the *849St 
suppression of anti-German activities. In Berlin it wa} The 
intimated that relations with Vichy were more tense} panied 
than ever. The Pétain régime, like other Europeaa} lustrati 
governments, may be expected to adopt a much mor tegic s¢ 
positive attitude if the reports of German weaknes| Mexicz 
are substantiated. 


nounce 
Davip H. Popper srante 

NEW MEMBER OF RESEARCH STAFF * wi 
The Foreign Policy Association is pleased to an/ dan 
nounce the appointment to its research staff of Miss) 5. Ja 
Margaret La Foy, A.B., New Jersey College fot $20.00 
Women; A.M. and Ph.D., Bryn Mawr. Miss La Foy) public 
attended the Graduate Institute of International] Highw 


Studies in Geneva during 1938-39, and after com| 
pleting her Ph.D. acted as field consultant on inter} po, 
national affairs for the National Federation of Bust} o¢ a, 
ness and Professional Women. For the past few only a 
months she has been engaged in special research fot} ;, £1) 


the Foreign News Department of Time Magazine fense’ 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 13, JANUARY 16, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation# 


to the 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, NM. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lagt, Secretary; Vera MicHetss Dean, Editor consul 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. The 


Sees 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


fepub 


