_ 
e 
Fl 


rength 
Britain 
ald ef- 
ontem- 
should 

States 
ster its 
/ estern 


course 
1 settle- 
as well 
her re- 
nerican 
yund in 
nington 
items: 
lation in 
Budget. 
believed 
1 be ex- 
already 
1e Naval 
ew light 


or” met- 
America, 
came to 
ea to the 
nen their 
Secretary 
ew York 
§. Brazil, 
service 1S 
it. 
yn in the 
the Ad- 
sumption 
»ducts at 
/hile this 
the Hull 
problem 
‘ute form 


ttlement 
ent con- 
iths ago. 
products 
now in 
slovakia 
shington 
nt grant 
‘or those 


STONE 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XVII, No. 52 OcToBER 21, 1938 


Clear, Concise, Comprehensive 


FOREIGN Po.icy Reports present the historical background 
and current developments of some one international problem. 
Published twice a month, forthcoming Reports will cover 


The Czechoslovak Crisis American Defense Policies 
Foreign Policy of Poland Soviet-Japanese Relations 
Diplomatic Alignments in Europe 


Subscription: to FPA members, $3; to non-members, $5. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


ASIATIC SEQUEL TO 


THE MUNICH ACCORD 


W HILE the effects of the Munich peace have not 

been so drastic in the Far East as in Europe, 
they have been nonetheless disturbing and—in their 
ultimate possibilities—perhaps equally far-reaching. 
These effects may be seen in three fields: the in- 
creased influence of the army extremists in govern- 
ment councils at Tokyo, Japan’s flouting of Britain 
by its attack on Canton, and the strengthening of 
Tokyo’s ties with the Rome-Berlin axis. 


General Ugaki’s resignation from the Foreign 
Ministry on September 29 removed the last brake on 
military-fascist extremism in Japan. The domestic 
importance of this event may be gauged by the fact 
that Japanese moderates had been grooming General 
Ugaki for the Premiership. Its significance for Jap- 
anese foreign policy is even greater. General Ugaki 
tesigned over a difference of opinion regarding the 
competence of the proposed China Affairs Board, 
controlled by the army. By insisting that this Cabinet 
organ should direct military, political and economic 
policies affecting China, the Japanese army was in 
effect wresting jurisdiction of the Chinese conquest 
from the Foreign Ministry. Behind this issue, how- 
ever, a struggle was also being waged over immedi- 
ate policies—affecting the scope of military operations 
in China, the degree to which the interests of West- 
ern powers should be respected, and the advisability 
of an attack on Canton. The terms imposed by Hitler 
at Munich tipped the balance against the moderates 
at Tokyo. General Ugaki’s resignation was followed 
by that of Naotake Sato and Hachiro Arita, the two 
former Foreign Ministers who had been made ad- 
visers to the Foreign Office in an effort to strengthen 
Ugaki’s hand against the extremists. The China Af- 
fairs Board was constituted in the way desired by the 
Japanese military, and the Canton offensive was 
launched on October 12. 


Under the new dispensation at Tokyo, the possi- 


bility of salvaging Western interests in China has 
become even more precarious. Reduction of Canton 
by Japanese arms would be a death-blow to the eco- 
nomic importance of Hongkong, wholly aside from 
the military-strategic consequences to this British 
colony. A Japanese occupation of Hainan island, 
which can no longer be ruled out, would gravely 
menace French Indo-China. Recent Japanese state- 
ments foreshadow an attempt to gain control of the 
foreign settlements and concessions at Shanghai and 
Tientsin. There can be little doubt that Japan’s rulers 
now hope to establish an exclusive hegemony 
throughout China, and that success in achieving this 
aim would threaten Indo-China, the Philippines, and 
the Dutch East Indies. 


Japan’s attitude toward the Western democracies 
after the Munich peace has its corollary in the en- 
hanced respect accorded the Berlin-Rome axis. On 
October 1 Lieutenant-General Itagaki, Japanese War 
Minister, telegraphed Hitler “profound felicitations 
on the brilliant success achieved by Germany in the 
Czechoslovak issue.” Ambassadorial changes reflect 
the altered outlook. Toshio Shiratori and Lieutenant- 
General Hiroshi Oshima, new Japanese Ambassa- 
dors at Rome and Berlin respectively, were co- 
authors and negotiators of the “anti-Comintern 
pact.” Major-General Eugen Ott, who assisted von 
Ribbentrop in the negotiations leading to signing of 
the pact, is now German Ambassador at Tokyo. 
There are reports that this pact may soon become an 
open military alliance. 

While these developments have spurred Japan to 
greater military efforts, they afford little immediate 
help to its campaign of conquest. After nearly three 
months, the Japanese forces in the Yangtze valley 
have covered but half the distance from Kiukiang to 
Hankow. China’s rail communications, however, have 
been cut south of Canton and north of Hankow. 


The fall of these cities would be a serious blow to 
the Chinese cause, but there is no certainty that it 
would prove fatal. Japan would still be faced with 
the difficult problem of pacifying interior areas and 
of financing profitable economic development. Its 
anti-Comintern allies have no funds to spare for this 
task. Only the Western democracies, which continue 
to furnish the bulk of Japan’s war supplies, could ad- 
vance the huge credits that would be needed. Self- 
interest would seem to preclude such action. League 
states, by virtue of a report adopted by the Council on 
September 30, now have the option of applying the 
sanctions of Article XVI against Japan. It may be 
doubted whether any League state, save possibly the 
U.S.S.R., will utilize this legal right to restrain Jap- 
anese aggression in China. T. A. Bisson 


BRITAIN SEEKS TO PACIFY PALESTINE 


Encouraged by unmistakable signs of Nazi sym- 
pathy at a moment when Britain's prestige is badly 
shaken, a relatively small number of Arab terrorists, 
recruited from Palestine and the neighboring coun- 
tries, have vigorously pressed their guerrilla cam- 
paign against the British, which has produced close 
to 2,000 casualties since early July. Ostensibly acting 
to punish Arab residents for their assistance to the 
insurgents, the British have withdrawn their police 
and administrative officers from Bethlehem and other 
towns in southern Palestine, where the rebels have 
forthwith set up their own administration. 

Weeks of turmoil have finally caused the authori- 
ties in London—whose dilatory tactics and indeter- 
minate policies have long encouraged the terrorists— 
to take action along the lines recommended by the 
Peel commission over a year ago. Strong reinforce- 
ments bringing the number of British troops to over 
20;000 are beginning the reconquest of abandoned 
territory. The government has enrolled 7,500 Jews 
in the police forces. On October 13 an identification 
card system was introduced to facilitate the detection 
of rebels. Measures of this type should restore peace 
and order in large areas of the country within a few 
weeks. 


The moment will then have arrived for unhurried 
consideration of a plan for the restoration of concord 
in Palestine, which the British government has prom- 
ised to present to Parliament after it meets on No- 
vember 1. This plan will probably be based on the 
report of the Woodhead Technical Commission, ap- 
pointed last spring by the British government to 
elaborate the details of the partition scheme sug- 
gested by the Peel commission in July 1937. It is 
generally believed that the uncompromising opposi- 
tion of all Arabs and many Zionists to partition will 
impel the Woodhead Commission to stress the im- 
practicability of such a solution for Palestine at the 


Page Two 


— 
— 


present time. On the other hand, the commission is 
not likely to endorse the Arab demands—formally re- 
iterated by a Pan Arab Congress at Cairo on Octo- 
ber 11—for annulment of the Balfour Declaration; 
immediate cessation of all Jewish immigration to the 
Holy Land; and establishment of an independent 
Arab government allied to Britain, with full minority 
rights for Jews. British military officials may also be 
expected to favor retention of a Jewish foothold in 
this vital strategic area, rather than its relinquish- 
ment to an Arab group which has not hesitated to 
make overtures to the Fascist powers. 


Meanwhile, Zionist circles, which have good rea- 
son to fear that the new British plan will severely 
curtail Jewish immigration, are demanding that the 
British government should not yield to Arab com- 
pulsion, but should carry out its pledge to assist in 
the establishment of a Jewish national home. In the 
United States Zionists have requested the State De- 
partment to support their cause in London, under the 
terms of the Anglo-American convention of Decem- 
ber 3, 1924. Under an interpretation of this treaty 
published on October 14, however, the United States 
cannot prevent modification of the terms of any 
mandate, but may merely “decline to recognize the 
validity of the application to American interests of 
any modification of the mandates unless such modifi- 
cation has been assented to by the Government of the 
United States.” American intervention will there- 
fore be confined to measures to safeguard American 
property in Palestine and the 9,000 American citi- 
zens resident there against unfavorable or discrim- 
inatory treatment. 


The basic issue is clear: Arabs are determined 
never to permit the Jews to become a majority in 
Palestine, while the Jews steadfastly refuse to accept 
any solution which would condemn them to a minor- 
ity status. In view of the ultimate necessity for 
cordial Arab-Jewish relations in the Holy Land, both 
sides might profitably consider a compromise settle- 
ment. Such a settlement would involve retention of 
British supervision for the time being, large powers 
of local self-government for Jewish and Arab dis- 
tricts, and agreement on a maximum rate of Jewish 
immigration for a period of ten or fifteen years, 
without decision on the question of final majority 
status. If an annual immigration figure of 20,000 
Jews—approximately equal to the average rate of 
arrival in the ten years 1927-1936—were accepted 
and fully maintained, the Jews would constitute only 
44 per cent of the population at as late a date as 
1960. A rational compromise of this sort would pro- 
vide a foundation for the resumption of peaceful re- 
lations among Arabs, Jews and Britons which could 
not fail to benefit them all. DAvip H. PoprER 


b 


LOO 
THE 
Owi 
Interna 
Lima, 
tance i 
Ameri 
Monte 
for thi 
Latin j 
trend - 
econor 
a com: 
to the 
makin; 
comes 
shiftin 
prestis 
with ¢ 
the Ut 
suppo 
oceans 
Latin 
Alt 
been | 
in Eu 
tratior 
quest 
spreac 
tators! 
to use 
regarc 
threat 
Eurof 
influe 
Leagu 
Leagu 
Gene 
| for th 
. doubt 
| impe: 
consi 
quent 
effect 
resigi 
the ¢ 
activi 


opini 
Roos 
was 

gent! 
him 

Own. 
pear 
Unit 


In 


——— 
er, 


SiON is 
ally re. 
1 Octo- 
ration; 
1 to the 
endent 
uiNnority 
also be 
nold in 
nquish- 
ated to 


od rea- 
everely 
hat the 
b com- 
SS1St 1n 

In the 
ate De- 
der the 
Decem- 
} treaty 
1 States 
of any 
lize the 
‘ests of 
modifi- 
t of the 

there- 
nerican 
an Citi- 
liscrim- 


‘rmined 
Ority in 
) accept 
minor- 
sity for 
id, both 
> settle- 
tion of 
powers 
rab dis- 
Jewish 
1 years, 
na jority 
20,000 
rate of 
ccepted 
ite only 
date as 
ald pro- 
-eful re- 
h could 


)PPER 


oom 


Washington News Letter 


LOOKING TOWARD 
THE LIMA CONFERENCE 


Owing to recent developments in Europe, the Eighth 
International Conference of American states, meeting at 
Lima, Peru, on December 9, is assuming a special impor- 
tance in Washington as well as in the capitals of the other 
American republics. Since the last regular Conference at 
Montevideo (1933) and the Inter-American Conference 
for the Maintenance of Peace at Buenos Aires (1936), 
Latin American policies have been gradually reshaped. The 
trend is toward a greater inter-American solidarity, closer 
economic and cultural ties between American countries, and 
a common front of the Western Hemisphere with respect 
to the world’s political problems. The State Department is 
making every effort to facilitate this movement, which be- 
comes increasingly important to its foreign policy with the 
shifting of the balance of power in Europe. The diminished 
prestige of Britain after Munich, and its preoccupation 
with Central Europe and the Mediterranean, indicate that 
the United States may no longer be able to count on British 
support in simultaneously maintaining the security of two 
oceans and protecting its interests both in the Orient and 
Latin America. 

Although the Administration’s good neighbor policy has 
been in part responsible for this growing solidarity, events 
in Europe have accelerated the trend. The increasing pene- 
tration of Germany and Italy into Latin America in the 
quest for raw materials has been accompanied by wide- 
spread Fascist propaganda. The methods of the Fascist dic- 
tatorships in South America, and their avowed willingness 
to use force as an instrument of policy in Europe, are now 
regarded by some Latin American countries as an eventual 
threat to their security. The growth of power politics in 
Europe has been paralleled by the declining prestige and 
influence of the League of Nations. The absorption of the 
League in European affairs, the financial burden involved in 
League activities, and the geographical distance from 
Geneva have also diminished Latin America’s enthusiasm 
for the League. Finally, the good neighbor policy has un- 
doubtedly gone a long way to allay fears of United States 
imperialism, against which League’ membership was once 
considered a counterweight. The League system, conse- 
quently, no longer appears to be either a necessary or an 
effective protection. Eight American republics have already 
resigned from the League or served notice of resignation; 
the others, while cooperating in many of the technical 
activities of the League, are becoming disillusioned in the 
practicability of its ideals and in its ability to preserve peace. 
Evidence of a common attitude toward non-American 
issues was found in the reaction of governments and public 
opinion in the Latin American republics to President 
Roosevelt’s two appeals to Chancellor Hitler. His action 
was praised everywhere, and the governments of the Ar- 
gentine, Brazil, Chile, Peru and others publicly supported 
him and seconded his appeals with cables of their 
own. Today, as in 1917-1918, many of these countries ap- 
pear to favor collaboration and parallel action with the 
United States in larger matters of foreign policy. 


In purely regional affairs, the announcement on Octo- 


ber 10 of the arbitral award in the Chaco dispute between 
Paraguay and Bolivia marked an important milestone in 
inter-American relations. Representatives of six republics 
formed the mediation commission which brought about the 
final settlement of this vexatious and costly boundary con- 
flict. Two days later, Ecuador appealed to five of these re- 
publics for intervention “in a friendly manner” to settle its 
century-old boundary dispute with Peru. The United States 
and Mexico are at present anxiously seeking a compromise 
formula to resolve their current quarrel over expropriation 
claims before the opening of the Lima Conference. These 
claims may finally be adjudicated by an impartial commission 
under the Gondra treaty of 1923. Such conciliatory pro- 
cedures offer a striking contrast to the present strong-arm 
methods practiced in Europe. 

The Lima Conference will thus convene in an atmosphere 
conducive to inter-American agreement, which should lead 
to further discussion of some system of regional security. 
It will offer an opportunity to work out the techniques of 
international cooperation in an area not torn by serif, as is 
Europe today. It meets at a time when there is widespread 
feeling that the Americas must strive to remain aloof from 
European difficulties and ideologies, while practicing the 
“American principle of pacific settlement of ianeemaiion 
disputes” against a background of democracy and inter- 
American solidarity. 


THE LIMA AGENDA 


The program for the Lima Conference has been approved 
by the various governments, members of the Pan American 
Union. It consists of seven chapters—the organization of 
peace, international law, economic problems, political and 
civil rights for women, intellectual cooperation and moral 
disarmament, the relations between the Pan American 
Union and the International Conferences of American 
States, and reports. The questions which will more than 
likely receive the most attention are those dealing with 
economic problems and the organization of peace. 


Organization of Peace. In the section devoted to the 
organization of peace, the most ambitious proposal for dis- 
cussion is the creation of a League or Association of Ameri- 
can Nations. The Buenos Aires Conference delegated 
Colombia and the Dominican Republic to prepare a scheme 
for such an organization. In times past, unsuccessful efforts 
have been made to graft political functions onto the Pan 
American Union, which acts as a permanent administrative 
office only for cooperation between the nations in economic, 
legal, social and cultural matters. In view of the negative 
attitude of the Argentine delegation and others in 1936 to 
any political organization of the Americas, little hope for 
this project is entertained for 1938. A plan to create an 
Inter-American Court of International Justice will more 
than likely have a similar fate, since the Argentine, the 
United States and others have always maintained that, as 
international laws have universal application, they should 
not be subjected to regional juridical opinion. To press for 
proposals implying serious collective obligations might have 
the effect of dividing the American republics into two 
camps—which would be hardly conducive to future har- 
mony. 


eae 
- — 


Consultation. Another important topic for deliberation 
is the perfecting and coordination of inter-American peace 
instruments. Discussion regarding sanctions and determina- 
tion of the aggressor will be renewed, and the delegates will 
consider further projects to strengthen the means for pre- 
vention of war. The Buenos Aires Convention for the 
Maintenance, Preservation and Re-establishment of Peace— 
popularly known as the “Consultative Pact”—was hardly a 
mutual guarantee of collective security, although it was ex- 
tremely important as a new procedure for concerted action. 
Article II of the Consultative Pact is merely an agreement 
to consult with other American states to determine whether 
they find it desirable to ‘eventually cooperate in some action 
tending to preserve the peace of the American continent.” 
The present conciliatory attitude among American coun- 
tries, however, and the increased possibilities of a general 
European war, may impel the delegates to seek a more 
definite provision for consultation and a more effective 
machinery for insuring peace than now exists. It also seems 
probable that an effort may now be made to set up some 
sort of a permanent Inter-American Consultative Commit- 
tee, as was suggested by the United States delegation in 
its draft convention on treaty coordination and neutrality. 
Such a committee would have the continuing function of 
assisting states in the observation of treaty obligations and 
in their collaboration on ways and means of preventing 
conflicts, while also furnishing a permanent mechanism for 
the consultation provided for in the Buenos Aires treaties. 
Finally, either another declaration will be made or a treaty 
signed with respect to the American doctrine of the non- 
recognition of territory acquired by force. This will involve 
no new commitments, since three previous conferences and 
the declaration at Washington on August 3, 1932 have all 
embodied this principle. 


, 


Economic Problems. The effort to promote closer eco- 
nomic relations between the American countries, as affirmed 
at Buenos Aires in the resolutions to reduce trade restric- 
tions and to insure equality of treatment, will be continued 
at Lima. It is generally admitted, however, that tariff re- 
duction by multilateral treaty is impossible, and that the 
only practical application of these resolutions lies in bi- 
lateral negotiation. Other items on the agenda are immi- 
gration, the possibility of establishing an Inter-American 
Institute of Economics and Finance, and the appointment 
of a commission to bring about uniformity between com- 
mercial and civil law. Also important will be the efforts to 
facilitate inter-American communications by reviewing such 


Page Four —= 


— 


questions as port and shipping facilities and the progress 
of the Pan-American Highway. 

The Hull reciprocal trade program has had reasonable 
success in increasing the percentage of United States trade 
with Latin America. Ten reciprocal trade treaties now exist 
with these countries. The inroads of German trade at 
the expense of the United States, however, cannot be min- 
imized. The willingness of Germany to absorb great quan. 
tities of the raw material products of Latin American coun- 
tries, and the system of payment by use of ASKI marks 
and compensation agreements, create serious handicaps for 
the United States exporter. Although South American 
countries are more than ever susceptible to North Ameti- 
can economic influence, the natural trend of their trade in 
many respects is in the direction of Europe. Moreover, the 
tendency toward economic nationalism is finding expres. 
sion in the promotion of industrialization, no good omen 
for increased foreign commerce. The two related prob 
lems—(1) export subsidies, whether direct, in the form of 
loans to South American banks or as blocked currency, and 
(2) import restrictions in the form of exchange controls, 
quotas, import duties and discriminatory freight rates—are 
very complicated. It is extremely doubtful if the Lima 
Conference can go far in alleviating this situation. 


The United States will send a strong delegation to the 
Lima Conference, in all probability headed by Secretary of 
State Hull, whose modest diplomacy has made him ex- 
tremely popular in South America. This fact, and the rumor 
that President Roosevelt may also be present, stresses the 
point that the United States is particularly anxious to sup- 
port every effort to preserve the peace, commerce and 
solidarity of the Americas. The United States delegation 
will again be careful to avoid giving the impression of 
leadership ; and will seek to accomplish its ends by means 
of the “friendly cooperative approach” rather than by pres- 
sure. With the eclipse of Saavedra Lamas as a political 
figure in the Argentine, it is possible that the Argentine 
delegation will be less obdurate than in 1936 regarding 
regional security proposals. 

In the present state of world affairs, the formal items on 
the agenda at Lima are likely to be overshadowed by larger 
political and economic issues. These larger issues may not be 
resolved, or*even dealt with in the final conventions or reso- 
lutions. But if the mutual understanding of the American 
states is increased, this understanding will eventually find 
expression in closer ties between the republics of the West- 
ern Hemisphere. FREDERICK T. MERRILL 


The F.DP.A. Bookshelf 


Our Trade with Britain: Bases for a Reciprocal Tariff 
Agreement, by Percy Wells Bidwell. New York, Coun- 
cil on Foreign Relations, 1938. $1.50 
The problems to be faced in negotiating the contem- 

plated Anglo-American trade agreement are competently 

discussed in their economic context: trade trends in both 


countries, and the recent history of their commercial 
policies. 


And So To War, by Hubert Herring. New Haven, Yale 
University Press, 1938. $2.00 


An able and caustic if somewhat “journalese” presenta- 
tion of the case for American neutrality and non-involve- 


ment in the corflicts of Europe and Asia. Should be read in 
conjunction with Hamilton Fish Armstrong’s We or They. 


The Republics of South America, by a study group of 
members of the Royal Institute of International Affairs. 
New York, Oxford University Press, 1937. $8.50 


A balanced and scholarly survey for the general reader 
of the geography, history, economics and culture of South 
America’s ten republics. The work, which was prepared 
under the chairmanship of Philip Guedalla, includes chap- 
ters on the land problem, labor conditions and the labor 
movement, finances, religion, culture and education, and 
international relations. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 52, OcrospgEr 21, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonD Leste BuELL, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MicHs.es Dsan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


ARS 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


er, the 
expres- 
1 omen 

prob- 
orm of 
cy, and 
ontrols, 
es—are 
e Lima 


to the 
etary of 
11m. ‘ex- 
e rumor 
sses the 
to sup- 
rce and 
legation 
ssion of 
y means 


by pres- 
political 
rgentine 
garding 


items on 
oy larger 
y not be 
or reso- 
merican 
ally find 
re West- 
2RRILL 


e read in 
or They. 


| Affairs. 
.50 

al reader 
of South 
prepared 
es chap- 
the labor 
tion, and 


National 
tAN, Editor. 


