FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Vout. XVIII, No. 1 


OcTOBER 28, 1938 


THE NAZI DRIVE TO THE EAST 
by Stoyan Pribichevich 


Yugoslavia, Rumania and Hungary are directly in the 
path of Germany’s drive to the east. The question is 
what will be Germany’s next objective? This report an- 
alyzes the political and economic development of these 
three countries, as well as Nazi penetration since 1933. 


October 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents each 


BRITAIN COUNTS THE COST OF MUNICH 


peal vehement protests by members of all 
parties in Britain against the Munich settle- 
ment, the prestige of the Chamberlain government 
appears to have suffered little damage. Relief over 
the last-minute escape from war has outweighed re- 
sentment over the price of peace. Prime Minister 
Chamberlain has fortified his position in Parliament 
by the argument that the Labor party had become 
war-mongers at the very moment when their previous 
advocacy of disarmament and pacifism had weak- 
ened British power. By combining the rdle of peace- 
maker and proponent of rearmament, Mr. Chamber- 
lain has spiked the guns of the Labor opposition, 
which lacks effective leadership and program for re- 
taliation. Even the divergence of opinion within the 
Conservative party can hardly succeed in overthrow- 
ing the Prime Minister, for Mr. Churchill is not 
trusted throughout the country, and Mr. Eden has 
been slow in organizing any secession movement. 
Britain's failure to take up cudgels on behalf of 
Czechoslovakia was probably due to its unwilling- 
ness and inability to check the Nazi drive, either by 
bluff or a brief conflict. Not only were the Conserva- 
tive leaders anxious to come to terms with the Hitler 
régime and divert its expansion to the east, but pub- 
lic opinion at large was undecided regarding the 
fundamental issues involved. Revision of the Ver- 
sailles treaties and concessions to Germany had so 
long been urged in pre-Hitler days, especially by 
liberal and radical spokesmen, that the average citi- 
zen was torn between sympathy for German nation- 
alism and antipathy for Nazi dictatorship. In the last 
analysis, the prevailing belief that the Sudetens were 
not worth the bombardment of London proved a de- 
cisive factor in British inaction. 
Whether Britain was militarily ready to deter 
Germany, if the Chamberlain government had de- 
cided to force the issue, remains a highly debatable 


question. In a lorig war, Czechoslovakia, France, 
Russia and Britain unquestionably would have had 
a military and economic predominance; in a brief 
conflict, however, Germany and Italy were in a posi- 
tion to deliver a smashing blow at Czechoslovakia, 
and to inflict heavy damage on Paris and London. 
The military issue turned on the question whether 
the Czechs could have resisted long enough—two 
or three weeks—before being rescued by a French 
land attack, Russian air resistance and British naval 
power. The answer will never be known, but the 
Conservatives can argue successfully that they were 
unable to bluff Hitler because of the impossibility of 
giving immediate aid to Czechoslovakia. 

Whether this military weakness was the real cause 
of the Chamberlain surrender, or merely a conven- 
ient alibi, considerable criticism has already been lev- 
eled at the failure of the government—in power 
since 1931 and in dread of Hitler since 1933—to be 
prepared for just such an emergency. Despite gigantic 
defense appropriations—totaling £162.6 million for 
1937, £261.6 million for 1938 and £319.6 million 
for 1939—only the navy functioned effectively dur- 
ing the mobilization. Neither the anti-aircraft units 
in the Territorial Army (corresponding to our Na- 
tional Guard) nor the Air Raids Precaution Depart- 
ment at the Home Office were fully prepared for 
attacks on London, while the Air Force, probably 
superior to Germany in first-line planes and pilots, 
still lacked actual and potential reserve planes. Con- 
flict over governmental jurisdiction and distribution 
of costs has hampered A.R.P. for many months, 
while military and civilian experts wrangled over 
the defense of London, the largest and most vulner- 
able capital in the world. Production of airplanes has 
been delayed by bureaucratic red tape, the desire to 
perfect models before manufacture, and lack of co- 
ordination in industry. This unpreparedness, appat- 


ently involving widespread inefficiency and negli- 
gence, may arouse very serious opposition in Par- 
liament. The Prime Minister is expected to reshuffle 
his Cabinet, filling the vacancies left by the resigna- 
tion of Mr. Duff Cooper and the death of Lord Stan- 
ley, and perhaps creating new ministries of Supply 
and Civilian Defense. 

The immediate consequence of the Munich truce 
is acceleration of the armament program, involving 
intensified production, enlarged air forces, additional 
A.R.P. work and probably the creation of expedi- 
tionary forces. The Minister of War, Mr. Leslie 
Hore-Belisha, announced on October 10 the complete 
reorganization of the Territorial Army, with three 
new anti-aircraft divisions and new mobile divisions, 
capable of overseas combat. Leaders of the govern- 
ment have frequently hinted at schemes for “national 
registration,” by which all citizens would be trained 
and perhaps eventually conscripted for wartime ser- 
vices. With the loss of Czechoslovakia as an ally, 
the weakening of France, and the isolation of the 
Soviet Union, the British are compelled to count the 
cost of Munich. Since the defeat of Germany would 
now require far greater offensive operations in the 
West, the British are facing increased taxation and 
public debt, new dislocations of the national econ- 
omy, and the introduction of semi-wartime control 
of civilians. Simultaneously, the Chamberlain gov- 
ernment will probably endeavor to strengthen its 
diplomatic position by liquidating the Far Eastern 
conflict, restoring British prestige in the Near East, 
and seeking to detach Italy from the Rome-Berlin 


axis. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 
POLES SEEK TO STEM NAZI TIDE 


Since Germany's triumph at Munich, Poland and 
Hungary, backed by Italy, have struggled to enforce 
their territorial claims on Czechoslovakia and to 
build defenses against German eastward expansion. 

The Hungarian government, threatened at home 
by a growing Nazi movement which called for im- 
mediate military action against Prague, was appar- 
ently restrained in September by warnings from 
Rumania and Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia’s partners 
in the Little Entente. On October 5 it called for im- 
mediate negotiations and, in a conference on Octo- 
ber 8, demanded outright cession of Magyar major- 
ity districts in Slovakia and Ruthenia, and a plebiscite 
in the rest of Slovakia, leaving its claim to Ruthenia 
to be pressed by Poland. These Magyar areas, deter- 
mined according to the 1910 census figures, appar- 
ently included about 13,000 square kilometers of 
territory, with a population of over a million, and 
Bratislava — Czechoslovakia’s only important port 
on the Danube—as well as other important towns, 
containing Magyar minorities. The Slovak auton- 


Page Two 


omist government, to which Prague had entrusted 
the negotiations, allowed Hungary to occupy two 
towns, but offered only a fraction of the territory 
claimed. Opposing the use of the 1910 census, it 
asked that cessions be determined according to the 
figures of either 1930 or 1870, taken before the in- 
tensive ““Magyarization” of Slovakia. When a dead- 
lock was reached, Hungary broke off the negotiations, 
appealed to the Munich powers, and on October 14 
ordered the mobilization of five army classes. At 
the same time, armed bands of Hungarian irregulars 
made incursions into Slovak and Ruthenian territory. 


Poland, which has already taken from Czechoslo- 
vakia four districts which include, according to 1930 
Czech figures, 76,000 Poles and 120,000 Czechs, is 
primarily concerned with the problem of setting 
limits to Germany’s eastward expansion. Czechoslo- 
vakia’s grant of antonomy to Ruthenia apparently 
added to its apprehensions. Remembering the two 
“autonomous” Ukrainian’ republics created under 
German control in 1918, the Poles fear that Ruthenia 
may soon become an Ukrainian “Piedmont” and seek 
to unite, under German auspices, the 40 million or 
more Ukrainians of Poland and the Soviet Union 
into a new state. Foreign Minister Beck, who had 
long sought to create a bloc of states forming a 
cordon sanitaire between Germany and the Soviet 
Union, redoubled his efforts to bring about a parti- 
tion of Ruthenia, Czechoslovakia’s eastern province, 
in which Hungary would receive the lion’s share, 
while Poland and Rumania would gain small por- 
tions along their frontiers. On his visit to Bucharest 
on October 19, however, he failed to secure King 
Carol’s support for this plan, which had received 
Mussolini's discreet support. 


Meanwhile Germany, which has already gained a 
stranglehold on Czechoslovakia’s defenses, railways 
and economic life, wants to keep eastern Czecho- 
slovakia intact as an open road to the east. After 
visits by Czech, Slovak and Ruthenian ministers, Ger- 
man officials on October 20 expressed their coolness 
to the Hungarian and Polish claims. They intimated 
that Germany would oppose the partition of Ru- 
thenia, and insisted that Czechoslovakia’s cessions 
to Hungary be limited to districts which—presum- 
ably according to the 1910 census—had Magyar 
majorities, thereby excluding Bratislava. Simultaneous 
attacks on Lithuania in the German and Polish press 
on October 19 created a suspicion that Colonel Beck 
was seeking to buy German support for the partition 
of Czechoslovakia by offering to partition Lithuania 
at the same time. 

On October 23 Hungary rejected a new Czech 
proposal, but scaled its demands for immediate ces- 
sions to about 10,000 square kilometers and offered 

(Continued on Page 4) 


ee OQ 


=— 


usted 
- two 
ritory 
us, it 
o the 
1e in- 
dead- 
tions, 
er 14 
s. At 
yulars 
‘itory. 
10sSlo- 
1930 
‘hs, is 
etting 
hoslo- 
rently 
2 two 
under 
thenia 
d seek 
ion or 
Union 
o had 
ing a 
Soviet 
parti- 
vince, 
share, 
1 por- 
harest 
King 
ceived 


ined a 
ilways 
'zecho- 

After 
5, Ger- 
olness 
imated 
of Ru- 
essions 
resum- 
Aa gyar 
aneous 
1 press 
1 Beck 
irtition 
huania 


Czech 
ite ces- 


offered 


———__—_ ——- ~~ 


Was hington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 25—To understand current pronouncements 
on American foreign policy, it is essential to take 
into account two general or widely divergent schools 
of thought which have emerged more sharply in 
Washington since the Munich settlement. Failure to 
recognize these two official points of view has re- 
sulted in several confusing—but quite natural—in- 
terpretations within the past few days. 


Mr. Kennedy’s Speech. Ambassador Kennedy's 
Trafalgar Day speech in London is a case in point. 
At least half of the ‘interpretive’ news stories sent 
from Washington accepted Mr. Kennedy's assertion 
that “it is unproductive for both democratic and 
dictator countries to widen the division now existing 
between them” as evidence of a major shift in Ad- 
ministration policy looking toward collaboration with 
the totalitarian states. This conclusion was not un- 
natural, in view of the fact that the Ambassador’s 
remarks contrasted rather sharply with certain past 
pronouncements from Washington, and the added 
fact that Mr. Kennedy's speech had been sent to the 
State Department in advance, read and approved 
without change. Other interpretations either de- 
scribed the speech as,a trial balloon, or accepted the 
State Department’s embarrassed explanation that 
our Ambassador was speaking as an individual. Mr. 
Walter Lippman ironically portrayed Mr. Kennedy 
as just another amateur diplomat airing his private 
views in public. 

Most of these explanations are wide of the mark. 
Mr. Kennedy was certainly not laying down a new 
foreign policy for the Administration, and it is doubt- 
ful whether he was flying a trial balloon. But neither 
was he merely voicing his own private opinions. In 
reality, he was expressing in his own words the 
point of view held by one of the two schools of 
thought represented in the State Department, and 
found in the inner group of the President's advisers. 


The influence of these two schools had been felt 
in Washington long before the recent crisis, and the 
respective positions had become familiar. One group 
(including professional diplomats as well as ama- 
teurs) had deprecated efforts to align the democra- 
cies against the dictatorships, on the ground that it 
was dangerous and futile to accentuate ideological 
differences. The second group (equally representa- 
tive of professional and non-career men, liberals and 
conservatives) had argued that concessions could not 


be made to the dictators without strengthening the 
aggressive tendencies inherent in fascism. Before the 
first meeting between Chamberlain and Hitler at 
Berchtesgaden, the State Department strove valiantly 
—if not always with conspicuous success—to fol- 
low a middle course half-way between these two 
extremes. For a brief interval, at the height of the 
crisis, both points of view found a common ground 
in the emergency steps taken by President Roose- 
velt. In the weeks since Munich, the march of events 
has not only demonstrated the increasing difficulty 
of a middle-of-the-road position, but has also re- 
vived the two schools of thought. 


Today it is quite apparent that both groups have 
been forced to shift their ground in important re- 
spects. But if the “concerted action” school sees no 
immediate opportunity to revive the democratic 
front in Europe, it is not yet prepared to abandon 
the Far East or to follow Mr. Chamberlain in mak- 
ing further concessions to Nazi Germany. On the 
other hand, the “collaborationists,” while urging the 
necessity for a solution of the “common problems 
confronting democracies and dictators alike,” are by 
no means prepared to accept peace at any price. Thus, 
in weighing the position of the United States in the 
post-Munich world, there is full agreement on the 
program for strengthening political and economic 
ties in the Western Hemisphere. There is also com- 


plete agreement on the rearmament program. 


Trade Issue to the Fore. If the Administration 
is forced to choose between limited collaboration or 
open opposition to the totalitarian states, the first 
issue is likely to center on economic and trade rela- 
tions. Last week unofficial reports from Berlin in- 
dicated that the German Economics Ministry is 
anxious to explore the possibility of a triangular 
trade agreement between the United States, Great 
Britain and Germany. Such an agreement, accord- 
ing to German sources, would make it possible for 
the Reich to purchase large quantities of American 
wheat, cotton and tobacco. While Germany lacks 
foreign exchange to pay for additional purchases in 
the American market, the triangular arrangement 
would enable the Reich to supply Britain with 
chemicals and other products, the proceeds of which 
would cover payments to the United States. 


Washington officials have no direct knowledge of 
this ingenious scheme, and in any case they will not 
be able to consider any new agreement until the 


British negotiations are terminated. But, assuming 
that the British government is prepared to make the 
concessions on farm products necessary to assure the 
signing of an agreement (which Washington still 
expects), then the whole question of the future of 
the Hull program will come up for consideration. 
Any agreement with the totalitarian states would 
certainly involve the sacrifice of the most-favored- 
nation principle. But even in Latin America, officials 
admit that modifications will have to be made to meet 
the exchange controls of countries like Argentina. 
When this larger issue is faced—as it must be in the 
near future—the Administration may be compelled to 
make a choice between the two schools of thought. 


W. T. STONE 


POLES SEEK TO STEM NAZI TIDE 
(Continued from Page 2) 
to submit disputed questions to Germany, Italy and 
Poland. Although Hungary apparently threatened 
attack in case of non-compliance by October 26, the 
three neutral powers seemed ready to settle remain- 
ing differences by compromise. pay) B. TAYLOR 


Page Four 


MR. BUELL GRANTED LEAVE OF ABSENCE 


The Board of Directors has granted Mr. Buell a 
six-months’ leave of absence, beginning January 1. 
He will organize for Fortune a series of round- 
tables, composed of representative business, pro- 
fessional, labor and intellectual leaders, to discuss 
and seek solutions for pressing national problems 
within the framework of traditional American 
ideals. The results of these discussions will be peri- 
odically published in Fortune. 

During Mr. Buell’s absence the Board has named 
Mr. Stone Acting President, while Miss Leet will be 
in charge of administration, including personnel. 
Mrs. Dean, of course, will continue as Research 
Director. 


While on leave, Mr. Buell will continue his respon- 
sibilities with regard to the general policies of the 
Association, especially the work of the Research De- 
partment and its publications. 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


People at Bay: The Jewish Problem in East-Central 
Europe, by Oscar J. Janowsky. New York, Oxford, 
1938. $1.75 


An excellent analysis of the problems of the five and a 
half million persecuted Jews living between the eastern 
border of Germany and the Soviet Union. The author 
rightly regards the “cold pogrom”—economic strangula- 
tion—as their greatest danger; he suggests the creation of 
a single responsible Jewish body to negotiate with the gov- 
ernments involved regarding feasible remedial measures. 


Hungary and Her Successors: The Treaty of Trianon and 
its Consequences, 1919-1937, by C. A. Macartney. Issued 
under the auspices of the Royal Institute of Interna- 
tional Affairs. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1937. $8.50 


A well-known British student of minority problems 
makes an exhaustive study of the regions which Hungary 
was forced to surrender under the treaty of Trianon. He 
‘ sympathizes with the Hungarian demand for treaty re- 
vision but believes that “integral revision” is impossible 
today. The only permanent solution of the problems of 
the Danubian basin, in his opinion, is transformation of 
that area into an Eastern Switzerland. Meanwhile, he 
advocates a “lesser revision,” which in accordance with 
the principle of self-determination would restore to Hun- 
gary sections of Czechoslovakia and Rumania at present 
inhabited predominantly by Hungarians. 


The Reciprocal Trade Policy of the United States: A 
Study in Trade Philosophy, by Henry J. Tasca. Phila- 
delphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1938. $3.50 
A scholarly analysis and defense of Secretary Hull’s 

commercial policy. 


Our Country, Our People, and Theirs, by M. E. Tracy. 
New York, Macmillan, 1938. $1.75 


An interesting and useful comparison—enlivened by pic- 
torial statistics—of many phases of political, social and 
economic life in Italy, Germany, the Soviet Union and 
the United States. By placing similar data for each 
country in parallel columns on the same page, Mr. Tracy 
permits readers to draw their own conclusions with re- 
spect to the superiority of democratic government over 
one-party, dictatorial régimes. While some of his state- 
ments might be challenged, the presentation is generally 
well balanced. The book represents a valuable educational 
experiment in the best democratic tradition. 


Land Utilization in China, by John Lossing Buck. Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press, 1938. 3 vols. $15.00 


This outstanding scientific study of Chinese agriculture 
is based on data affecting 16,786 farms and 38,256 farm 
families in 22 provinces of China, during the 1929-1933 
period. It includes chapters on topography, climate, soils, 
crops, livestock, marketing and prices, population, nutri- 
tion and standard of living. Land tenure issues, affecting 
tenantry and landlordism, are not treated. The second 
volume, an Atlas, is already published, while the third 
volume, or Statistics, will be issued shortly. 


The Government of the Soviet Union, by Samuel N. 
Harper. New York, Van Nostrand, 1938. $1.25 


In this excellent survey Professor Harper of Chicago 
University gives an illuminating analysis of the political 
structure of the Soviet state. The chapters on public ad- 
ministration, public services, and relations between the 
state and the individual are particularly valuable. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 1, Ocroper 28, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Nationa! 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste BuELL, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


B's 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


VoL 


| = 


wet 
nev 
to | 
pre 
Mu 
res: 
the 


by 


