a) 
PE 
the United | 
he added, 
ples of the 
‘w harvests 
feed them. 
ontribution 
1 out, “we | 
it, poultry, 
September 
sek an end 
cording to 
any foods, 
from ware- 
ind 6,000, | 
purchasers, 


September 

ed that the | 
ed 12,000, | 
to prevent | 
pean food 

of 1935-37, | 
ossible the 
luced. The 
ducing far 
hief poten- 
which itself 
ther foods, | 
nia, Yugo- 
ping a pfo- 
s. Canada, 
supplier of 
of meat fa- 


A has been | 
needs for | 
I. Lehman 


calories he ' 


eneficiaries. 
for the final 
aids, but he 
00. During 
-h Minister 


vat the cur- / 


*s a day, Of 


lied by the | 


The Ameti- 
ut the dire 
opportunity 


ency of the | 


. BOLLES 


General LibFary. * tt ‘Ts. 
Sat af ; ; 
rN AL re University of Mich! 
At {te r? > b QO; eiChican 
“ly ts Mite 
Ann Arbor. Michican C v s@ 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


a 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vout. XXIV, No. 50 


SEPTEMBER 28, 1945 


WILL U.S. REVISE ITS OCCUPATION POLICY IN GERMANY? 


A? a moment when the recent victories on the 
battlefronts have not yet been consolidated in 
a peace settlement affording at least a reasonable 
guarantee of future national security, the United 
States appears on the verge of a hasty demobilization 
of its armed forces, regardless of the effects this 
action may have on the nation’s foreign policy. By a 
curious irony it was the Supreme Commander of 
Allied Forces in Japan who unleashed the torrent 
of requests for speedy demobilization that the Army 
and Navy had been trying to hold in check in order 
to fulfill American commitments abroad. In a state- 
ment issued in Tokyo on September 17 General 
MacArthur declared that “within six months the 
occupation force, unless unforeseen factors arise, 
will probably number not more than 200,000 men, 
a size probably within the framework of our pro- 
jected regular establishment and which will permit 
complete demobilization of our citizen Pacific 
forces.’’ Although General MacArthur referred only 
to Japan in his remarks, he precipitated a storm of 
demands in Congress for more rapid demobilization 
of all the armed forces, and created the impression 
abroad that our rule of the defeated Axis countries 
would be brief and perfunctory. 


REPERCUSSIONS IN EUROPE. All subsequent 
oficial efforts to dispel the impression that the 
United States is now turning to consideration of its 
domestic problems, to the virtual exclusion of those 
abroad, have been like attempts to plug holes in a 
dike after the sea has been let in. Two days after 
the original MacArthur prediction was made in 
Tokyo, a news dispatch from Wiesbaden reported 
that Germans in the American Zone had taken the 
Supreme Commander’s statement about Japan as an 
indication that American occupation of the Reich 
also might not be as long or as rigorous as had been 
expected. If news coverage of the London meeting 


of the Council of Foreign Ministers had been as ade- 
quate as that in the American Zone in Germany, it 
might be assumed that the effects of the statement 
would have been observed there, too. For Secretary 
of State Byrnes undoubtedly found his bargaining 
position weakened as the other Allies observed this 
evidence that the United States was in haste to wind 
up the war and might, therefore, accept proposals 
for the disposal of the Italian colonies or a settle- 
ment in Eastern Europe that it regarded as consider- 
ably less than satisfactory. 


Whatever the repercussions of the speedy demobil- 
ization of our armed forces may have been on the 
first peace conference, its effects on the program 
for the occupation of Germany are already clear. Re- 
ports from Germany show that the military govern- 
ment is so greatly hampered by the loss of high-point 
men who were familiar with their assignments, and 
by the general shortage of replacements that even 
routine tasks are now being left undone. The ma- 
chinery for our military government of Germany, in 
short, threatens to come to a full stop. 

GOALS STILL REMOTE. If all our major ob- 
jectives in Germany had already been attained, this 
situation would hardly be a serious matter. The con- 
trary, however, appears to be the case, for reports 
of the hasty withdrawal of troops are being accom- 
panied by developments that clearly show we are 
still far from realizing the two goals in Germany 
that the Allies set at Potsdam last July: denazifica- 
tion and demilitarization of the defeated Reich, and 
establishment of democratic self-government and a 
reorganized economy. 

From the earliest phase of the occupation until 
the present moment, the denazification policy has 
encountered difficulties that have rendered its en- 
forcement a hit-and-miss affair. Immediately after 
Germany's collapse, the speed and finality with which 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


on eee Pore a ~ = : 
CORE Da ce atic mee ear BE ere ekg oe fe ee - 


= 


‘Many, 


Nazis were removed from positions of political or 
industrial responsibility depended largely on the effi- 
ciency and political convictions of the local military 
commanders. More recently the Army has assigned 
top priority to the denazification program. Yet de- 
spite this emphasis on denazification, recent unoffi- 
cial surveys in the American Zone show a wide- 
spread breakdown in the program. General Patton, 
head of the Military Government in Bavaria, who 
recently declared that, in his opinion, “far too much 
fuss has been made regarding denazification of Ger- 
” is merely the most outspoken proponent of 
the view that some Nazis are “indispensable” to the 
efficient operation of certain services, particularly 
those of an economic nature. Under these conditions, 
and with Nazis remaining in positions of manage- 
ment and direction of German industry and business, 
reports of a rapid reduction in the size of the Amer- 
ican occupying force seem distinctly premature. 
ECONOMIC POLICY NEEDS REVISION. An 
even more difficult job than denazification remains 
to be done in connection with the economic future 
of Germany, for there are signs that the deindustrial- 
ization progam devised at Potsdam last July is un- 
workable and will have to be revised. According to 
the Potsdam agreement, Germany was to be de- 
prived of its economic potential lest it use its vast 
industrial plant to rebuild military power. This 
drastic solution of the German problem, however, 
has inevitably had embarrassing consequences for 
the Allies, both in Germany and throughout large 
areas of Europe which formerly depended on Ger- 
many’s industries to supply them with essential man- 
ufactured goods. 
As far as Germany itself is concerned, Britain and 


Page Two 


LL 
es 


the United States now find themselves obliged to 
send food into the country to maintain subsistence 
standards of living, for Germany, deficient in food. 
stuffs, was formerly dependent on exports of its 
manufactured goods to furnish it with agricultural 


products from abroad. Certain measures can, of | 


course, be taken by the Allied Control Council to 
make Germany more nearly self-sufficient, and the 
economic integration, on September 20, of the four 
zones of occupation is an important step in this 
direction. Under no circumstances, however, will it 
be possible for Germany to become a self-supporting 
unit again unless it is permitted to operate certain 
industries. And since it is difficult under moderp 
conditions to distinguish between industries that may 
be used for war and those that produce only for 
peace-time purposes, provision for long-term Allied 
supervision of Germany's industrial plant will have 
to be made. 


program is revised accordingly, local AMG officials 
may be expected to continue in their present course 
of suspending action directed toward the complete 


for lack of directives, they can do nothing about 
establishing permanent controls over those industries 
they permit to operate to fill minimum requirements 
for German civilians and the occupying forces. Per- 
haps the most important step that could now be taken 
toward curbing the present dangerous trend toward 
a new American withdrawal from Europe would be 
the publication of a full report on the problems that 
still confront the occupying authorities in Germany. 


WHINIFRED N. HADSEL 


ECONOMIC GOALS INFLUENCE LABOR PARTY’S POLICY ABROAD 


The address given by Foreign Secretary Ernest 
Bevin on August 20 still remains the only general 
statement of the Labor party’s foreign policy. The 
keynote of that address was the continuity of British 
policy, and those who have looked for abrupt 
changes have found only disappointment in later de- 
velopments. Perhaps the renewal of the Cripps offer 
for Indian self-government, made on September 19, 
and Prime Minister Atlee’s proposal on September 
23 to submit the Palestine question to the United 
Nations organization foretell more active moves in 
the field of external affairs. Meanwhile, the Labor 
Cabinet is engaged in the peace settlements now 
being negotiated by the Council of Foreign Ministers 
in London, and British representatives are attempt- 
ing to orient the nation’s economic future in the far- 
reaching Anglo-American conversations which still 
continue in Washington. 

BRITAIN LOOKS ABROAD. Mr. Bevin referred 
to Britain’s guiding aim in foreign policy when he 
said on August 20 that “the Government regards 


the economic reconstruction of the world as the 
primary object of their foreign policy,” and it is to 
be assumed that Britain’s own economic dilemma, 
thoroughly reviewed during the current Washington 
conference, was also very much in the forefront of 
Bevin’s thought. This concern for economic develop- 
ment, along with Britain’s desire to maintain its 
position as a power of the first rank, provide a broad 
background from which all contemporary British 
moves abroad may be viewed. 

Although British relations with Western Europe, 
especially France, remain much the same as under 


the Churchill coalition régime, there is some indica- 


tion of a stiffer attitude toward developments in 
Southeastern Europe. There is little evidence, how- 
ever, of Britain's position on Germany's future. In 
urging British coal miners to produce more coal fot 
Europe and thus come to his aid in pursuit of British 
aims abroad, Bevin stepped outside time-worn diplo- 


| 
| 
| 


| 


—— 


tet. For 
will go | 
nent are 
fuel and 


ECO} 
many At 
ability © 
tion whe 
ask for 
Phrased 
should | 
itself ec 
and fing 
the cent 
Washin 

That 
now se 
the Brit 


. res 
Until these facts are recognized and the Potsdam | aie 


sterling 
betwee! 
its sear 


’ sine Weis _ | flatly re 
deindustrialization of Germany. At the same time, |.’ 


ling cre 
_* 
wish tc 
examp! 
wider 1 


) LAB 


econon 
retainis 
bonds. 
Indian 
hopes 
speedy 
India, 
there. 
minior 
mon wi 
Septen 
spokes 
, ferenc 
est he: 
will e: 
now | 
portio 
war, ; 
| buyin, 
In 
holdis 
reasor 


POREIC 
‘ lea lou. 
econd-« 


he mot 


matic phraseology to highlight one of the crucial | 
problems Britain as well as America faces this win- | Be 


ee 
LL , 


obliged to 
subsistence 
nt in food. 
orts of its 
igricultural 
es can, of 
Council to 
it, and the 
of the four 
ep in this 
ver, will it 
‘Supporting 
‘ate certain 
er modern 
es that may 
e only for 
erm Allied 
t will have 


1e Potsdam 
{G officials 
sent course 
e complete 
same time, 
hing about 
e industries 
quirements 
forces. Per- 
yw be taken 
-nd toward 
e would be 
»blems that 
1 Germany. 


HADSEL 


AD 


tld as the 
ind it is to 
c dilemma, 
V ashington 
orefront of 
ic develop- 
laintain its 
ide a broad 
ary British 


‘rn Europe, 
e as undef 
yme indica- 
opments in 
lence, how- 
; future. In 
re coal for 
t of British 
worn diplo- 
the crucial 
25 this win- 


au 
eeV”7_~" 


ter. For political objectives of whatever intention 
will go astray if conditions on the European conti- 
nent are reduced to chaos because of the lack of food, 
fuel and transport. 


ECONOMIC NECESSITIES. What is puzzling to 
many American observers is the apparent desire and 
ability of the British to aid in European reconstruc- 
tion when at the same time they find it necessary to 
ask for economic assistance from the United States. 
Phrased somewhat differently, it is also asked: Why 
should Britain request aid unless it is willing to help 
itself economically by adjusting its imperial trading 
and financial relations? This question raises one of 
the central issues reportedly under discussion in the 
Washington conference. 

That some form of aid will be extended to Britain 
now seems certain. Yet the difficulty of changing 
the British imperial preference system and loosening 
the restrictions inherent in the operations of the 
sterling bloc serve to point up the close relationship 


| between Britain’s desire for economic prosperity and 


its search for security. British spokesmen have not 
flatly refused to release some of the excessive ster- 
ling credits now blocked in London. But they will 
wish to retain a firm hold on the sterling area, for 
example in the Middle East and in India, until some 


| wider multilateral trading system is assured. 


{ 
) 


LABOR AND THE EMPIRE. Britain’s domestic 
economic needs can be met most easily at present by 
retaining already established imperial and trading 
bonds. Thus, in offering to renew negotiations for 
Indian independence, the Labor government not only 
hopes to fulfill Britain’s wartime pledge but also, by 
speedy alleviation of the political struggle over 
India, to retain its position of economic advantage 


| there. That India may readily be brought to Do- 


minion status and associated with the British Com- 
monwealth still appears doubtful. For the offer of 
September 23 was quickly and severely criticized by 
spokesmen in India where the internal political dif- 
ferences remain insurmountable. But of chief inter- 
est here is the fact that, by controlled trading, Britain 
will expect to benefit from the Indian sterling credits 


now blocked in London. They represent the major 


portion of Britain’s sterling debt incurred during the 


| war, and up to this point have been earmarked for 


| buying British products only. 


In the Middle East the necessity for tenaciously 
holding on to imperial ties, aside from economic 
feasons, is reinforced by Britain’s present estimate of 


Page Three 


its world power position, now much reduced in rela- 
tion to that of the United States and the U.S.S.R. 
Russian delays in effecting a joint military with- 
drawal from Iran, its hope to strengthen its position 
in the Dardanelles and in the Arab world, and the 
Soviet desire to administer Tripolitania as a single 
trustee, suggested on September 18, all offer adequate 
reason for British reluctance to loosen imperial 
bonds. Prime Minister Atlee’s proposal to submit 
the Palestine problem to the United Nations came 
shortly after the new government had called to Lon- 
don the chief British representatives in the Middle 
East, to canvass the possibility of drafting a well- 
coordinated policy for that entire area. 


At the conclusion of these meetings a Foreign 
Office communiqué of September 20 stated that “His 
Majesty's Government are impressed with the de- 
sirability of strengthening the relations with the 
countries of the Middle East on a basis of mutual 
cooperation and the promotion of their social and 
economic well being.” Britain’s continued security in 
the Suez and retention of oil rights in the Arab 
world will perhaps demand less active support for 
a Zionist solution in Palestine than Laborites have 
proposed heretofore. For it appears axiomatic that 
Britain must preserve its imperial ties whether the 
government in London is Laborite or Conservative. 


FACING FACTS. It is clear that Britain faces 
great difficulties in reaching the goals set by Foreign 
Secret: ury Bevin. But Britain will adhere to its deci- 
sion to retain what it has, even if this forces the Brit- 
ish to “go it alone’ until the nation is sure that 
America in particular will actively support the wider 
system of multilateral trade which it sponsors, and 
until greater international political stability is as- 
sured. These considerations may seem archaic in an 
age destined to be influenced by the use of atomic 
energy both in war and peace. But if the United 
States and Russia operate on the basis of power prin- 
ciples devised before the use of the atomic bomb, 
there is little hope that Britain can do otherwise. As 
the United States swiftly turns from the war, scaling 
down almost daily its estimate of what is needed in 
occupying Germany and Japan, and as Russia pushes 
its demands for territory and influence into historic 
British zones, any British government would be negli- 
gent if it did not husband its resources and attempt 
to guarantee its position abroad by all means at its 
disposal. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 50, SEPTEMBER 28, 1945. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, 

1921, 
address on membership publications. 


Street, 
second-class matter December 2, 


me month for change « 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
President ; 


at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act 


As ssociat 
VERA phighibetis 


yn, Incorporated. National 
Dean, Editor. Entered as 
ollars a Year. Please allow at least 


Dorotny F. Leger, Secretary 
of March 3, 1879. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Q's 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


—* 


f 
é 
: 


- @wre Oye FE Che twee © ee ae a 


: 


we 


UTS - 


Ory Oe cote Ot & 
a << 


Washington News Letter | 


! 


FIRM WHITE HOUSE LEADERSHIP NEEDED ON FOREIGN ISSUES 


Although it is less than three months since Senate 
approval of the United Nations Charter pointed the 
United States toward a clear-cut foreign policy, the 
country suffers today from confusion and uncertainty 
in international affairs. Responsibility for clarifica- 
tion rests with President Truman, who only gradu- 
ally is showing publicly that he is aware of the task 
confronting him as a result of the American decision 
to adopt a policy of cooperation with other govern- 
ments. Only strong Presidential leadership can give 
national policy in world affairs its greatest possible 
force. Yet the great hopes of the American people 
for world cooperation may be disappointed if a 
courageous foreign policy is sacrificed to narrow, 
political considerations. 


CONFUSIONS IN POLICY. Current confusion 
stems from three sources. First, as a result of the lack 
of firm leadership and discipline within the Admin- 
istration, federal agencies arrive at independent con- 
ceptions of foreign policy and fail to compose their 
differences. Second, while the Administration has 
kept clearly in mind its goals in foreign policy, it 
has failed in some instances to work out precise 
details respecting the many questions that confront 
it. Third, for lack of firm leadership through Presi- 
dential explanations to the public, voters are today 
advocating contradictory propositions in foreign af- 
fairs. Thus there are those who propose swift reduc- 
tion in the size of the Army and Navy in conjunction 
with retention of Pacific bases, which need the su 
port of adequate military forces, and with member- 
ship in the United Nations Organization, whose 
Charter assumes that its leading members will be 
strong militarily. 


General MacArthur added to the confusion 
by his prediction on September 17 that within 
six months he would need only 200,000 soldiers for 
occupation. This naturally pleased the large number 
of persons who, for excellent reasons, hope for swift 
demobilization of the “citizen” armed forces. Yet 
overswift demobilization could weaken the United 
States in its job of policing the European and Asia- 
tic enemies, and induce forgetfulness of the impor- 
tance of long-term military strength in this new era 
of peace. On this matter the country seriously needs 
guidance from the President. On September 18 and 
again on September 19 Mr. Truman commented on 
demobilization; however, a bold and understandable 
exposition on his part of the necessity of a sound 
military policy for realization of our foreign policy 


goals is still needed. 


A strong statement issued on September 19 by 
Acting Secretary of State Dean Acheson revealed 
that the policy-making agencies and General Doug. 
las MacArthur, the Supreme Commander in Japan 
applying policy, actually disagreed about the nature | 
of policy. Acheson, without mentioning MacArthur | 
by name, insisted it was the task of civilian, not mil. | 
itary, agencies to evolve the country’s foreign policy, | 
Nevertheless, neither civilian nor military authorities | 
in Washington have sent MacArthur a precise di- 
rective on the policy it is his duty to apply; the White | 
House declaration published on September 23, which 
was taken by messenger to MacArthur from Wash. | 
ington on September 6, is merely ‘‘a statement of 
general initial policy relating to Japan after sur. 


render.” 


PROBLEM OF MAINTAINING WORLD) 
UNITY. The President has contributed directly to 
the public's confusion by his occasional observations 
on foreign policy. Although he sincerely supported | 
the United Nations Charter, for example, he sug. | 
gested that he believed in nationalist self-reliance 
when he stated on August 9: “We are going to main- | 
tain the military bases necessary for the complete 
protection of our interests and world peace.” Despite | 
his interest in territorial bases, he stated in Berlin on | 
July 20: “There is not one piece of territory . . . | 
that we want out of this war.” This fiction was pene: | 
trated by Soviet diplomats, who at the London meet: } 
ing of the Council of Foreign Ministers have re 
portedly excused their interest in obtaining African 
territories by reference to American interest in Pacific 
territory. 


Nevertheless, President Truman has given con- 
vincing signs that he agrees with former Assistant 
Secretary of State Archibald MacLeish, who declared 
on August 4 that maintaining our unity with the 
world may be more difficult than writing the Charter. 
On his return from the Potsdam Conference, Pres- 
ident Truman said on August 9: “Victory in a great 
war is something that must be won and kept won. 
It can be lost after you have won it—if you are cafe- 
less or negligent or indifferent.” His problem now is 
to buck the forces of isolation and make plain to the 
American public that day-to-day commitments are 


necessary in the foreign field if we are to cement the | 


military victory just won and save ourselves from | 
another war. | 


BLAIR BOLLES | 


1918: 


Was 
ton dos 
charact 
on the 
in Lon 
session 
ber 11. 
which 
the Ur 
and C] 
questic 
by any 
the B 
Molot 
be pre 
vote O 
for th 
conser 
ment, 
and C. 
been 
Britais 
meetit 


posal 


to bre 


ing si 
clinat: 
of a | 

ML 
tions 
sprins 
plagu 
worlc 
of G: 
spon 
form 
set « 
assui 


