





nt 


dle 
ed 
ce 
ler 
de 
nd 
tic 
so 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


4353 














Entered as second 
class matter December 
goo* 2, 1921, at the Post 
sod) Sonn Office at New York, 
ov 1 Ue ce N. Y., under the act 
3 wear® oF mv of March 3, 1879. 
v- 
Ta) 





Vor. XVIII, No. 36 


JUNE 30, 1939 





— 


BUILDING THE THIRD REICH, by John C. deWilde 


Here, briefly and simply, are answers to the questions 
which are always asked about present trends in Germany: 
Has the standard of living declined? Have occupation of 
Czechoslovakia and Austria helped or hindered the German 
economy? What is the attitude of the Germans toward 
future expansion in Europe? Toward persecution of the 
Jews? Toward war with Britain and France? 


World Affairs Pamphlets, No. 5 
(F.P.A. membership covers this series) 


25 cents a copy 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 











DEADLOCK 


| 


AT TIENTSIN 





oo some hesitation, obviously due to the 
special features of the Tientsin crisis, the 
United States has now declared itself firmly opposed 
to Japan’s new anti-Western offensive. Through a 
series of apparently routine steps, the American gov- 
ernment has effectively countered Japan’s attempt to 
divide the Western powers by temporarily concen- 
trating its attack on British interests at Tientsin. 


AMERICAN MOVES. Secretary Hull’s statement 
of June 19, expressing the concern of the United 
States over the “broader aspects” of the Tientsin 
dispute, was supported by two protests delivered on 
the same day at Tokyo. In the first case, the American 
Chargé d’ Affaires protested the Japanese naval block- 
ade established June 15 against the Kulangsu Settle- 
ment at Amoy, where the United States possesses a 
direct jurisdictional interest. In the second case, the 
Chargé d’ Affaires requested permission to publish an 
exchange of notes, and made further oral representa- 
tions, concerning Japanese bombings of American 
properties in China. While this move was not di- 
rectly concerned with the issues at Amoy or Tientsin, 
it served to emphasize American opposition to 
Japan’s activities in China. On June 21, moreover, 
Secretary Hull announced that the American Consui- 
General in Tientsin, utilizing a statement drawn up 
by the local American Chamber of Commerce, had 
formally objected to the adverse effects of the block- 
ade on the interests and general welfare of the 
American nationals in the city. Finally, on June 22, 
Admiral Yarnell, Commander-in-Chief of the Ameri- 
can Asiatic fleet, bluntly rejected a Japanese demand 
that American nationals and naval vessels be with- 
drawn from Swatow, which Japanese military forces 
had just occupied. Similar action was taken by the 
British naval commander, and additional British and 
American naval vessels were dispatched to Swatow. 


While this joint Anglo-American stand against 
Japan's pressure on Western interests in China has 
not reached the stage of reprisals, it has apparently 
tended to curb further and more extreme Ja 
advances. During the past week the British and 
French Concessions at Tientsin have evidently settled 
down to a long siege, with no immediate prospects 
of a compromise settlement. Electrification of a 
barbed wire barricade has tightened Japan’s strangle- 
hold on the Concessions, although an acute food 
shortage has apparently been averted by the partial 
admission of supplies. The stripping and searching 
of British nationals at the barricades has aroused 
public opinion in Britain and called forth vigorous 
official statements, but the British authorities show 
no inclination to adopt strong measures of economic 
reprisal. Taking hope from the fact that Japan has 
thus far failed to present official demands on the 
larger issues at stake, they are still seeking to obtain 
some form of local settlement. 

THE BASIC “ISSUES. It may be~doubted, how- 
ever, whether a showdown between Japan and the 
Western powers can long be postponed on the 
broader questions affecting China. In order to estab- 
lish its “new order” in East Asia on a firm basis, 
Japan must oust Western interests from China as 
well as crush the resistance of the Chinese na- 
tional armies. These two problems are intertwined. 
Through various restrictions, the Japanese authori- 
ties have already succeeded in throttling Western 
trade and business in most of “occupied” China. 
Complete Japanese control of China’s economic life, 
however, cannot be achieved so long as the Western 
traders and bankers maintain their bases in the for- 
eign concessions and settlements. Even under present 
conditions, Western nationals take a considerable 
share of China’s trade. The foreign banks in Shang- 
hai and Tientsin continue to support the Chinese 

















national currency, as the sole measure of defense 
against Japanese fiat money and exchange control 
restrictions. By direct loans to the Chinese national 
government, both the United States and Britain have 
signified their opposition to Japan's effort to dom- 
inate China. In the last analysis, Japan, to attain its 
full objectives in China, must overcome this Western 
Opposition. 

The Western powers, for their part, are de- 
fending a traditional economic stake of considerable 
proportions. Before the Sino-Japanese war broke out, 
Britain possessed investments of approximately 
$1,250 million and the United States of about $250 
million in China. The United States held first place 
in China’s foreign trade in 1937, with total Ameri- 
can exports and imports valued at roughly $150 
million, excluding Hongkong and Manchuria. Be- 
hind the immediate economic stake in China, more- 
over, lies the broader question of the future of the 
whole Far East. If Japan establishes full control of 
China, a new regional economy dominated from 
Tokyo will emerge in eastern Asia. The world trend 
toward autarchy and economic nationalism will be 
accentuated, with additional restrictions on interna- 
tional trade. Japan’s project for large-scale cultiva- 
tion of raw cotton in north China, for example, will 
deprive American cotton growers of one of their 
major markets. China, moreover, constitutes merely 


_FRANCE YIELDS HATAY TO HOLD TURKISH SUPPORT 


The signature on June 23 of a Franco-Turkish 
mutual assistance agreement—coupled with a treaty 
ceding the Hatay Republic, once known as the Sanjak 
of Alexandretta, to the Turks—emphasizes France's 
anxiety to tighten its alliances against the fascist 
powers. The mutual assistance pact, similar to the 
Anglo-Turkish accord of May 12, is a provisional 
document binding both governments to cooperate 
“in case of an act of aggression that might lead to a 
war in the Mediterranean region” and designed also 
to “assure the establishment of security in the Bal- 
kans.”’ In concrete terms, it is believed the Turkish 
government has granted French and British vessels 
freedom of passage through the Dardanelles in case 
of a European war. Use of the Straits and Turkish 
ports would be of the greatest assistance to the West- 
ern powers in retaining command of the eastern 
Mediterranean. It is also a prerequisite for a Balkan 
campaign by Western and Soviet troops, or even 
for passive protection of the vital oil fields of Ru- 
mania and Iraq against exploitation by German or 
Italian invaders. In some quarters conclusion of the 
lengthy negotiations at Paris and Ankara was in- 
terpreted as a hopeful augury for the consumma- 
tion of an Anglo-Soviet pact, since Turkey would be 
unlikely to open the Dardanelles to France and 


Page Two 








ey 
—— 


the first line of defense for the Western powers jy 
the Far East, as Japanese moves into southeasterp 
Asia indicate. The security of the Philippines, Indo. 
China, the Dutch East Indies, and Malaya depends 
largely on the ability of the Western powers to tur 
back Japan’s challenge in China. 

The area of conflict in the Far East has been fyr. 
ther enlarged by heavy fighting on the Manchoukuo. 
Outer Mongolia frontier near Lake Buir Nor, 
confirmed by Moscow on June 25. A series of 
battles between Soviet-Mongolian and Japanese. 
Manchurian forces, featuring airplane engagements, 
has apparently been taking place in this region since 
May 11. According to Soviet sources 82 planes—s9 
Japanese and 23 Soviet-Mongolian—have been shor 
down in this period; the Japanese reverse thes 
figures, assigning the larger loss to their opponents, 

From Moscow also came the announcement a | 
June 25 that a trade treaty had been concluded be. 
tween China and the Soviet Union. Details were 
lacking, except that the new treaty was signed on 
June 16 and contained provisions establishing official 
trade bureaus in both countries. It is surmised that 
Soviet exports to China will consist of airplanes, 
tanks and other war materials, which will be covered 
partly by Chinese tea and silk and partly by long. 
term credit arrangements. 

T. A. Bisson 


Britain without assurance that the U.S.S.R. and the 
Western powers would act in a common cause. Dis. 
patches from Moscow, however, failed to reveal | 
evidence of progress in this direction, although ten- 
sion in Europe and the Far East appeared to be fore- 
ing Britain toward an agreement with the Soviet] 
Union at almost any cost. | 


TURKS ACQUIRE SYRIAN TERRITORY. The 
definitive cession of Hatay to Turkey, scheduled to 
take place on July 22, represents a blow to French 
prestige throughout the Middle East. Under the | 
Syrian mandate this coastal district adjacent to Tur 
key—singled out because of its strategic harbor and 
its Turkish minority of 40 per cent—was accorded 
a special régime giving the Turks certain cultural 
and administrative rights. After September 9, 1936, | 
when France and Syria initialed a treaty providing | 
for termination of the mandate in three years 
Ankara protested that Turkish interests would not 
be adequately safeguarded under a Syrian govern 
ment. Involved negotiations followed in Geneva 
and Paris, and in 1937 provision was made for estab- 
lishment of an autonomous area supervised by the 
League of Nations and linked with Syria for pur 
poses of foreign policy and fiscal affairs. 

It soon became apparent that a non-Turkish bloc 

















On 
tal 
lat 
es, 
ed 
12: 


the 


the 


and | 


ded 


iral 
36, 


ing | 
ars, | 


not 
ern 
eva 
tab- 
the 


pur- 
bloc 











—_—_—_— 








Page Three — 


of ethnic groups would dominate the territory's 
electoral assembly. By a policy of threats and what 
some French observers regarded as deliberate provo- 
cation of disorder within Hatay the Turks then com- 
pletely sabotaged the new régime. France, unwilling 
to perpetuate a dispute in an area of secondary im- 
portance, eventually agreed to permit Turkish troops 
to enter the area and on July 3, 1938 was rewarded 
by the signature of a Franco-Turkish pact of friend- 
ship. The Turkish inhabitants of Hatay subsequently 
managed to elect a majority in its Parliament and 
have since engaged in drastic ‘‘turkification’” of the 
entire district. 

FRANCE RENEGES ON SYRIAN PLEDGE. 
The relinquishment of French commitments in Syria 
raises the question of the lengths to which the West- 
ern states are justified in going to contain Germany 
and Italy within their present territories. As a manda- 
tory power the French agreed to be responsible “for 
seeing that no part of the territory of Syria and the 
Lebanon is ceded or leased or in any way placed 
under the control of a toreign power.” Besides their 
outright violation of this pledge the French have 
also engaged in dilatory tactics, postponing the 
achievement of self-government by the Syrians. The 
treaty of 1936 has not been ratified by the French. 
Conversations last fall between the former Syrian 
Premier, Jamil Mardam Bey, and French Foreign 
Minister Georges Bonnet resulted in modifications 
of the treaty, designed to give greater protection to 
France's strategic stake in the Middle East. On 
November 14, 1938, M. Bonnet undertook to seek 
ratification of the new accord in the French Parlia- 
ment by the end of January 1939. Yet Parliament 
has not acted; Syrian nationalists have come into 
sharp conflict with the French authorities and have 





a 


rioted on numerous occasions; and a French declara- 
tion accompanying the Franco-Turkish pact now 
states that France will not “renounce in favor of any 
third party the mission that it assumed in Syria”— 
indicating that France may not intend to relinquish 
the territory to the Syrian government. 

Thus the French, temporarily at least, have won a 
new friend in Turkey, but only by establishing dan- 
gerous precedents. They have abandoned overseas 
territory for a diplomatic guid pro quo. They have 
alienated Arab nationalists for years to come, al- 
though they may be able to utilize strife between 
Turks and Arabs to preserve their own position as 
a balancing factor in the area. Worse still, they have 
given new impetus to fascist propaganda and in- 
trigue in the Arab world. By means of radio, the 
press, social clubs and alleged financial aid, Rome 
and Berlin are diligently fishing in the troubled 
waters of the East, seeking to assure the Arabs of 
their interest in the struggle for Arab independence. 
Tangible proof of their efforts was afforded by the 
visit of Khalid al Hud, emissary of King Ibn Saud 
of Arabia, to Chancellor Hitler over the weekend of 
June 18 and by subsequent semi-official admissions 
of German support for the Arab peoples. If they 
are astute in diplomacy and mindful of the past, 
Arab leaders will play the fascist powers off against 
the Western democracies in order to secure the best 
possible terms for themselves in the future; but in- 
cidents like the cession of Hatay may do much to 
throw them into the fascist camp. 


Davin H. Poprper 


WHAT WILL GERMANY DO? Vera Micheles Dean, 
David Popper and Paul Taylor will discuss this ques- 
tion on Thursday, June 29, on the F.P.A.’s weekly radio 
broadcast over Station WNYC, from 8:30 to 8:45 p.m. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Air War: Its Psychological, Technical and Social Implica- 
tions, by W. O’D. Pierce. New York, Modern Age Books, 
1939. 50 cents 


Brief history of the technical advances of aviation, 
coupled with consideration of the effects of air warfare on 
civilian morale in the future. 


Red Star Over China, by Edgar Snow. New York, Random 
House, 1938. $3.00 


A revised edition of this best seller, with a new section 


containing an excellent analysis of the first year of the 
Sino-Japanese war. 


International Law and Diplomacy in the Spanish Civil 
Strife, by Norman J. Padelford. New York, Macmillan, 
1939. $6.00 


A scholarly treatment of some of the war’s outstand- 
ing problems, from the point of view of the student of in- 
ternational law. Contains much valuable documentation 
on the development of “non-intervention.” 


The Rise of American Naval Power, by Harold and Mar- 
garet Sprout. Princeton, Princeton University Press, 
1939. $3.75 
This survey of American naval policy from 1776 to 1918 

admirably fills a gap which has hitherto existed in Amer- 

ican historical writing. The shift from a local defense 
navy to a powerful, long-range battle fleet mirrored 

America’s transition from a continental to a world power. 


Adjusting Your Business to War, by Leo M. Cherne. New 
York, Tax Research Institute of America, 1929. $6.50 
Information and advice to the private business man on 

what to expect and what to do when war comes. Problems 


of neutrality and industrial and human mobilization are 
discussed. 


Source Book on the Government of England, by R. K. 
Gooch. New York, Van Nostrand, 1939. $4.25 


A comprehensive and well-organized collection of docu- 
ments concerning the English constitution and government. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 36, Jung 30, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMONnD LesLig BuELL, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


> 181 


1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








Washington News Letter 





sibben, 


pebdbrig 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JUNE 26.—Two important extensions of American 
foreign trade policy were announced almost simul- 
taneously last week. One was the signing in London 
of an Anglo-American agreement for the exchange 
of 600,000 bales of surplus American cotton for ap- 
proximately 85,000 tons of rubber from British 
Malaya. The other was an ambitious plan, sponsored 
by President Roosevelt, to lend $500,000,000 to for- 
eign governments (primarily in Latin America) 
during the next two years for the purpose of expand- 
ing American foreign trade in competition with the 
subsidized export systems of totalitarian governments. 

BARTER DEAL OMITS WHEAT AND TIN. 
The barter transaction involves somewhat smaller 
quantities of cotton and rubber than originally an- 
ticipated, and fails to include an exchange of wheat 
and tin, as proposed by the United States. This omis- 
sion, which is regretted in Washington, was due 
partly to objections raised by Canada and partly to 
lack of adequate storage facilities in Great Britain. 
Nevertheless, the agreement will bring the United 
States a war reserve stock equal to about one-fifth of 
its annual consumption of rubber and vill give Britain 
a war reserve of cotton equal to less than a fourth of 
its normal annual consumption of this commodity. 
The 600,000 bales of cotton, valued at $30,000,000, 
represent something less than 6 per cent of the 11,- 
000,000 bales surplus currently held in government 
warehouses in the United States. 

Both parties to the agreement are at great pains 
to deny that this deal bears any resemblance to the 
barter transactions of Germany and the totalitarian 
states. In fact, the word “barter” is strictly banned 
in all official publicity. Washington officials insist 
that the transaction will not interfere in any way with 
ordinary commercial trade, and point to the fact 
that the stocks will be held as reserves for a “major 
war emergency.” In the absence of war each govern- 
ment agrees not to dispose of its stocks (except for 
rotation to prevent deterioration) without consult- 
ing the other, and in no case “before a date seven 
years after the coming into force of this agreement.” 
Prices are fixed on the basis of the average market 
price during the period from January 1 to June 23, 
1939. 

In the case of rubber, production of which is lim- 
ited by the International Rubber Agreement, permis- 
sion must be obtained from the International Rub- 
ber Committee to release the additional amounts re- 


quired by the United States. The British governmen; 
agrees to use its “best endeavors” to secure favorable 
action. 

In the case of cotton, the agreement does not ex. 
clude the possibility of an export subsidy by the 
United States, a plan which is still favored by Sec. 
retary Wallace. But if the subsidy scheme should be 
carried out in the future, the United States would be 
compelled to compensate Britain by delivering ad. 
ditional amounts of cotton to cover the difference in 
price. 

LOAN PLAN STIRS CONTROVERSY. The 
new foreign lending project, announced June 22 as 
part of President Roosevelt's plans for a vast $3,860, 
000,000 “‘self-liquidating” loan program, is still 
something of a mystery in Washington. Originally 
drafted by a group of New Deal economists headed 
by Adolf A. Berle, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State, 
the project was apparently approved by the Presi- 
dent without consulting Secretary Hull and without 
regard to the views of Jesse Jones, RFC chairman, 





or Warren Lee Pierson, president of the Export | 
Import Bank, who have sought to keep Latin Ameri. | 


can loans on an orthodox basis. As might have been 
expected, it has already encountered stormy weather 
in Congress. 

From what has been said by Mr. Roosevelt, it 
would appear that advocates of the scheme propose 
to combat the Nazi trade drive in Latin America by 
extending governmental credits to open wider mar- 
kets for farm and industrial products of the United 
States. The figure of $500,000,000 is far larger than 
anything yet proposed by responsible officials in 
Washington, and exceeds the total annual exports 
of the United States to all Latin America, which 
averaged only $470,000,000 during the period 1934 
to 1938. Presumably, the loans would be made 
through the Export-Import Bank, although there is 
nothing to indicate that the Treasury and other gov- 
ernment agencies might not be involved. 

The Congressional attitude was foreshadowed last 
February, when Congress extended the life of the 
Export-Import Bank until June 30, 1941, but imposed 
a limitation of $100,000,000 on loans and obliga: 
tions outstanding at any one time. On June 24 Sena: 
tors Taft and Lucas joined Senator Borah in an at 
tack which cited the large dollar bond debts in 
default in fourteen Latin American countries, and 
denounced the plan as a repetition of the mistakes 
made by private investors in the twenties. 

W. T. STONE 





FC 


Ani 


