AG &* 4 


, Ae 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
—= oPs—Hittio»n wg 
German ip. eee ea ~s 
ction drive) ee OS ee brdpy 
’ M —— 
; he nn Arbor Mi a} 
additional 
nquered j 


Nations 


Reichswebll 


HEDIGER 


York, Knopf} yor. 


illed novelist 


so doing s 
eter. Her re 
an while 

use criticis 


n freedom ig 


York, Dial 


3. New York, 


in treatmeni 
Europe, an? 
ghting back. 
matic, while 
ath Column 
the Germa! 


New York, 


nd-the-world | 
ditor of PM 


t and Char- 
earce, 1941, | 


wiss people, | 
n, so far, to 


York, Cow- 


iis definition 
on-technical 
ory implicit- 
val strength 


k, Harper’s, 


time, by an 
tions within 
support of 
r statement 


ited. National 
itor. Entered as 


{American military 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y 


XXI, No. 44 


AucGusT 21, 1942 


CHURCHILL’S MOSCOW VISIT HIGHLIGHTS CHARTER ANNIVERSARY 


O more dramatic news could have been provided 
to highlight the anniversary of the Atlantic 
Charter than the announcement, on August 17, that 
Prime Minister Churchill, along with British and 
and economic advisers, had been 
©nferring with Stalin in Moscow, at the very mo- 
ment when the Nazis were making a dangerous 
thrust toward the Caucasus. A year ago, when Pres- 
Hent Roosevelt and Mr. Churchill set their signa- 
tures to the Atlantic Charter, Russia had but recent- 
ly entered the war as a result of the German invasion, 
ind the United States was not yet an active partici- 
|vant. In the intervening twelve months the United 
Nations haveisuffered major setbacks in practically all 
theatres of war. Germany has established its domina- 
ition over mc_t of Europe and a large sector of Eu- 
topean Russ:1, while Japan has overrun the prin- 
cipal coloni.., possessions of the Western powers on 
the Asiatic n ‘nland and in the Pacific Ocean. Yet 
ithe striking ...ag is that, in spite of all these set- 
backs, the U’ *ted Nations have been strengthened, 
father than \ ~~ ikened, in their détermination to con- 
tinue the war | » the bitter end; opposition to German 
domination on the European continent is rising, in- 
stead of declining; and the few remaining non-bel- 
ligerents in Europe and Latin America, instead of 
tushing to the camp of the ostensible victors, appear 
to act on the assumption that the final outcome will 
be determined by the United Nations. 

THE POWER OF IDEAS. This seemingly para- 
doxical development emphasizes the extent to which 
this war—like all wars throughout the centuries— 
is fought not only with tangible military weapons, 
but also with the intangible weapons of ideas and 
sentiments. It is not the military and industrial su- 
periority of the United Nations—much of which still 
temains at the stage of “‘potential’’—that has attract- 
ed the support of previously doubting peoples, or 
testrained them from joining the Axis ranks. It is 


the power of the ideas for which the United Nations, 
in all their great diversity of political and economic 
development, now stand—ideas which are being re- 
fined every day in the fire of the fight for survival. 


HOW ATLANTIC CHARTER LOOKS TO- 
DAY. Of the eight points of the Atlantic Charter, 
some have been subjected to searching, and justifi- 
able, criticism during the past year, and others have 
already been put to the test of practical politics. The 
belief is gaining ground that ‘the enjoyment by all 
states . . . of access on equal terms to the trade and 
raw materials of the world needed for their economic 
prosperity’ cannot be achieved without sacrifice of 
certain trade, tariff and immigration policies on the 
part of the United Nations, notably the advanced 
industrial powers. Similarly, it is becoming apparent 
that “the restoration of sovereign rights and self- 
government to those who have been forcibly de- 
prived of them’ cannot be carried into effect without 
some qualifications, unless the world is to plunge 
back into a state of anarchy in which sovereign na- 
tions, large and small, disregard with impunity the 
interests of the international community as a whole. 

Meanwhile, in the negotiations of Britain and the 
United States with the Soviet Union (the results of 
which were embodied in the Anglo-Soviet alliance 
of May 26, 1942, and the Soviet-American agreement 
of June 11, 1942), the three powers decided, for the 
time being at least, not to discuss Russia’s demands 
for some form of control over the Baltic states and 
portions of Poland, Finland and Rumania. These de- 
mands will have to be weighed in the light of the 
provision in the Atlantic Charter that there should 
be ‘‘no territorial changes that do not accord with the 
freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned,” 
and that the signatories ‘seek no aggrandizement, 
territorial or otherwise.” 

Increasingly strong emphasis has been placed, dur- 
ing the past year, on the desire, expressed in the At- 


lantic Charter, to secure ‘improved labor standards, 
economic advancement, and social security for all’’ 
—an objective strikingly set forth by Vice-President 
Henry A. Wallace on May 8, 1942, when he said 
that “the century on which we are entering—the cen- 
tury which will come of this war—can be and must 
be the century of the common man”; and that “the 
peace must mean a better standard of living for the 
common man.” 

While the Atlantic Charter made no reference to 
Asia or Africa, it is generally believed that its prin- 
ciples should apply to the Pacific Area—and it must 
be recalled that, among the twenty-eight United Na- 
tions which have subscribed to its principles are 
India, China, and the Philippines. Under-Secretary 
Sumner Welles commented on this point in his 
Memorial Day address on May 30, 1942, when he 
said: “The age of imperialism is ended. . . . The 
principles of the Atlantic Charter must be guaran- 
teed to the world as a whole—in all oceans and in all 
continents.” 

The expansion of the ideas of the United Nations, 
from the concept of democracy at home to the larger 


Page Two — 


ee 


concept of democratic co-existence of all nations, js 
opening up vistas of a new world order which can 
capture the imagination and win the support of all 
those for whom Axis domination is a dead end. This 
drift away from the apparent military victors has not 
been lost on Germany and Japan. It explains, in part, 
the rising tempo of German and Japanese brutal- 


ities, as exemplified by the execution of Dutch hos- 
tages and the cruelties inflicted on citizens of West- 
ern powers in Asia, as well as on their Asiatic well- 
wishers. These brutatities, in turn, merely steel the 
peoples of conquered countries in their determination 
to overthrow Axis rule. The United Nations have it 
within their grasp to expand the bare outlines of the 
Atlantic Charter into a working comradeship of all 
nations opposed to tyranny, and to establish a rela- 
tionship of equality in which the only advantage ‘en- 
joyed by so-called advanced countries will be the 
honorable responsibility of acting as helpful and 
sympathetic “trustees” for so-called backward areas 
until they, too, assume their share of international 
obligations. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


OUR FIRST GAINS IN PACIFIC HOLD HOPE FOR WIDER OFFENSIVE 


The Battle of the Solomon Islands is still partially 
veiled in the secrecy of uncompleted operations. What 
we know is that United States marines, with strong 
naval and air support, effected surprise landings, 
beginning August 7, and, in the face of considerable 
enemy resistance, have consolidated their shore posi- 
tions. This is the first American offensive in the war 
against the Axis, for even the Coral Sea and Midway 
naval victories represented the frustration of Jap- 
anese plans rather than the execution of our own. 
Yet our action is only a limited offensive—a fact that 
is not surprising in view of the length of the supply 
route to Australia, our problems on other fronts, 
and Japan’s geographical advantages in Far Eastern 
waters. The Solomons, moreover, are on the fringes 
of Japanese conquest—3300 miles from Tokyo—and 
there is no reason for thinking that victory here 
would lead to a “roll-back”’ through the Philippines. 
Although it is very encouraging for the American 
public to learn of our unsuspected striking power in 
the southwest Pacific, exaggerations of this power can 


For an analysis of political and economic condi- 
tions in Vichy France based on first-hand material, 


READ: 


Vichy France Under Hitler 
by David H. Popper 


25¢c 


Aucust 1 issue of ForEiGN Po.icy REPoRTS 
REporRTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 


Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 


only lead to a new misunderstanding of our war posi- 


tion, similar to the illusion that prevailed before | 


Rommel’s drive into Egypt and the German summer 
campaign in south Russia. 


JAPAN'S STRIKING POWER. What is the im- 
portance of our limited offensive in the Solomons? 
In a negative sense, a successful action would reduce 
the Japanese threat to our vital supply routes to the 
Far East. It would also interfere with any Japanese 
plans for a drive against Australia, although not 
necessarily making such a move impossible. This 
question is very important, for in late July Japan 
seized Gona and Buna in Papua—south of existing 
Japanese bases at Lae and Salamaua, New Guinea— 
as well as the Kei, Aru and Tanimbar islands, north 
of Australia. From their Papuan positions the Jap- 
anese then pushed overland toward Port Moresby, 
reaching Kokoda, where fighting is still going on. 
Although the high Owen Stanley Mountains lie be- 
tween the invaders and their possible objective, fav- 
orable geographical features cannot be relied on as a 
sufficient defense. In addition, Japanese control of 
the island groups referred to above is a threat to 
northwestern New Guinea and northern Australia. 
It is therefore conceivable that, when our marines 
struck at Tulagi, the Japanese were themselves on the 
point of taking some offensive action in the south- 
west Pacific. 

In a positive sense, victory in the Solomons would 
expose Japanese bases in New Ireland, New Britain 
and New Guinea to air and sea attacks. Actual in- 
vasion, as at Tulagi, would probably require consid- 


F 
mp 


ove 


Bo 


Lea 
am 


su) 
ne 


of 


| da 
As 
as 


| to 
te 

SL 
| 
cI 

St 
al 


h 


TS 
LT 


nations, is 
which can 
ort of all 
end. This 
rs has not 
1S, in part, 
se brutal- 
Yutch hos- 
of West- 
iatic well- 
' steel the 
‘rmination 
ns have it 


gable preparation and depend on the extent to which 
we had reduced Japan's naval superiority in Far 
fastern waters. The island-to-island method of con- 
quest is extremely costly against a well-entrenched 
enemy—far more so than an offensive on land. This 
brings out anew the importance of the continent of 
Asia as a base from which to defeat Japan, through 
the ultimate launching of a counter-offensive cen- 
tered in. China and flanked by supporting actions 
from India and, if events permit, Siberia. On such a 
front the offensive would be cheapest, and Japan 
could be made to pay the most in men and equipment. 


nes of the 


hip of all 


ish a rela- 
anta ge ‘en- 
ill be the 
Ipful and 
yard areas 
ernational 


; DEAN 
IVE 
war posi- 
ed before 


n summer 


is the im- 
olomons? 
ild reduce 
ites to the 
| Japanese 
ough not 


ible. This 


uly Japan 


f existing 
Guinea— | 


nds, north 
s the Jap- 
Moresby, 
going on. 
ins lie be- 
ctive, fav- 
ed on asa 
-ontrol of 
threat to 


Australia. 
r marines 
ves on the 
the south- | 


POSSIBLE POLITICAL GAINS. The political 
importance of success in the Solomons must not be 
overlooked, for it would have an excellent effect on 
morale in the United States, Australia and New 
Zealand and, in particular, improve our position 
among the peoples of Asia. The populations of In- 
dia, Burma, and other areas have undoubtedly been 
impressed by the speed of Japanese conquest. If we 
hold and extend our newly-won positions, a favor- 
able basis will exist for a - political offensive to 
strengthen the prestige of the United Nations 
throughout Asia. This is particularly true of India, 
where a new effort to reach a political settlement 
might derive some strength from the offensive opera- 


Page Three 


———— 
ee 


tions in the Solomons, even though the islands are 
thousands of miles from Calcutta. The Cripps mis- 
sion, it must be remembered, occurred in late March 
and early April of this. year, after an unbroken suc- 
cession of rapid Japanese victories. A new initiative 
in India might meet with more success, especially if 
the United Nations should take the offensive in 
Europe. 


The limited action at Tulagi can have significant 
consequences, but sensational results must not be 
expected. It would be foolish to ignore the fact that 
Japan possesses considerable offensive power in a 
number of directions, or to imagine that the opera- 
tion in the Solomons can by itself deter Japan from 
an attack on Siberia or India, if either move has been 
decided upon. But undoubtedly our blow in this re- 
gion, combined with the counter-action in the Aleu- 
tians, and the success of the United States air forces 
in harassing the Japanese in China and protecting the 
people of Chungking, can be used to good political 
advantage if we play our cards well. This, in turn, 
may help lighten our military tasks in the Far East 
by permitting us at a later date to initiate a land of- 
fensive against the Japanese with the support of the 
native peoples. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


CAN A “SECOND FRONT” BE OPENED IN NORTH AFRICA? 


The desperate passage of the Malta convoy adds 


‘weight to suggestions that, for a time at least, the 


second front against the Nazis will be in North 
Africa rather than in Western Europe. The present 
stalemate at El Alamein is more apparent than real. 
Both sides are rushing heavy reinforcements of men 
and material to the desert front, and the battle of 
supplies which is now being waged indicates that 
neither the Allies nor the Axis look on this theatre 
of war as a sideshow. 


BATTLE OF SUPPLIES IN DOUBT. For three 
days last week strong British naval forces fought off 
Axis attacks on a convoy which the Germans report 
as the largest to enter the Mediterranean during the 
war. The climax of the fighting during the 1,000- 
mile trip from Gibraltar to Malta was reached in the 
Sicilian Channel, between the southwestern tip of 
Sicily, and the North African bulge. Axis submarines, 
torpedo boats and bombers took part in the attack, 
the ““E-boats” apparently effecting the most damage. 
German claims that fifteen vessels totaling 180,000 


ltons had been sunk and that the British fleet pro- 


tecting the convoy had been shattered are clearly 
Suspect, but the announcement of the British Ad- 


| miralty indicates that serious losses beyond the air- 


ns would 
‘w Britain | 
Actual in- 
re consid- 


craft carrier Eagle and the cruiser Manchester were 
sustained in driving.the shipment of fighter planes 
and military stores through to besieged Malta. Only 
high stakes would warrant the risk of precious naval 


units, merchant ships and supplies. The maintenance 
of Malta, lying athwart Rommel’s supply route from 
Italy, is such a stake. 


While the great convoy battle was in progress, 
American and British air and naval forces were ac- 
tive in the eastern Mediterranean. On August 11 a 
large formation of American heavy bombers struck 
at four Italian cruisers lying in the harbor of Pylos 
(Navarino), Greece. Three cruisers were left badly 
damaged, one probably in a sinking condition. Two 
days later the guns of British warships poured tons 
of high’explosives into Rhodes, Axis stronghold in 
the Dodecanese Islands and likely jumping-off point 
for an attack on Cyprus or Syria. Of more immediate 
importance, perhaps, has been the persistent bomb- 
ing of Rommel’s supply lines. In recent weeks, Ben- 
gazi, Tobruk, Salum and Matruh have felt the 
weight of Allied bombs from both British and Amer- 
ican planes. Supplies from Crete, too, have been 
under constant attack, while motor-driven barges 
operating along the North African coast and trans- 
port columns in the desert have been blasted regu- 
larly. The success of all these operations, however, 
has not prevented large-scale reinforcements of men 
and material from reaching the Afrika Corps, and 
it is reported that in the last few days Rommel has 
concentrated his air strength to cover troop move- 
ments. Possibly this is a sign that the Nazi field mar- 
shal plans to be the one to break the deadlock. 


s| 


- 9 ag ak ——— . 


ae Pd Sen 6 ov 


U.S.-BRITISH COOPERATION GROWS. The 
extent of reinforcements reaching Auchinleck since 
he sect ber 3 Rommel at El Alamein cannot be ascer- 

ut it seems clear that substantial numbers of 
British and American tanks and planes have reached 
Egypt in the past few weeks. Improved “General 
Grants” have certainly arrived, while the latest 
American fighter planes and four-motored British 
Halifax bombers are now operating in the skies over 
Egypt. Equally significant is the presence in Egypt 
of an appreciable number of American tank crews 
and fighter pilots, the latter already in action. 
Trained for desert fighting in collaboration with the 
British, these men can be expected to play an impor- 
tant part in the approaching showdown. Behind the 
desert front, a truck assembly plant is operating at 
top speed, while repair services are reported ready 
to rival Rommel’s best efforts. To the southeast, de- 
velopment of the American supply base in Eritrea 
has been accented by the salvaging of an Italian 
drydock capable of handling naval vessels up to 
10,000 tons. Sunk when the Italians left Massawa, 
this drydock was recently brought to the surface by 
the genius of an American naval engineer. The com- 
bination of British experience and American drive 
may herald a change of fortunes on the burning 
sands of the Egyptian battlefield. 

Although one recent report has it that the Allies 


THE F.P.A. 


A Syllabus of the History of Chinese Civilization and 
Culture, by» L. C. Goodrich and H. C. Fenn. New York, 
The China Society, 1941. 75 cents 


The third edition of a sound and comprehensive guide 
to the study of important aspects of China’s historical de- 
velopment, with many additions to topics and reference 
materials. 


The China of Chiang K’ai-shek, by Paul M. A. Linebarger. 
Boston, World Peace Foundation, 1941. $2.50 
A technical description of the government institutions 
and party groups in China during the last decade and a 
half, especially valuable for the student of comparative 
government. 


A History of the Far East in Modern Times, by Harold 
M. Vinacke. New York, F. S. Crofts, 1941. $6.00 
Fourth revised edition of the best textbook on the mod- 
ern international relations of the Far East, with detailed 
treatment of the rise of present-day Japan and China. De- 
velopments are covered down to the early months of 1941. 


Modern Burma, by John L. Christian. Berkeley, California, 
University of California Press, 1942. (Issued under the 
auspices of the International Secretariat, Institute o 
Pacific Relations.) $3.00 


Since there has been no recent study of Burma this 


Page Four 


BOOKSHELF 


es, 
— 


are neglecting this front, there are many signs that 
Allied strategy calls for a great concentration of 
strength both in Egypt and the Middle East even at 
the expense of a landing in Western Europe. If this 


should be true, Egypt might well become the starti 
point of an offensive aimed not only at driving Ro 
mel out of North Africa but also at gaining grea 
freedom of action in the Mediterranean. This coul 
in turn, open the way for an invasion of Italy, 9 
more promising, a junction of forces with General 
Mikhailovitch’s guerrillas in Yugoslavia. Added to 
British-American collaboration with Russia in the! 
Caucasus region, so strongly suggested by last week’s 
Moscow talks, this strategy would do much to relieve 
the overwhelming pressure on the Russian armies. 


HowarD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


NEW ASSISTANT TO PRESIDENT 


We take pleasure in announcing the appointment 
of Mr. Sherman S. Hayden to the position of Assis- 
tant to the President, replacing Mr. William P. 
Maddox who has left us for government service. 
Mr. Hayden is a graduate of Harvard College and 
Harvard Law School, and received his Ph.D. in Inter- 
national Law and Relations from Columbia Univer- 
sity, where he has been for some years a member of 
the Department of Government. 


Westward the Course!—The New World of Oceania, by 
Paul McGuire. New York, William Morrow, 1942. $3.75 
A well-written account of an Australian journalist’s trip 

to the Pacific islands and the East Indies in 1940. The au- 

thor finds that the impact of Western imperialism on the 
peoples of Oceania, despite its mistakes, has been bene 


ficial. 
Victory in the Pacific: How We Must Defeat Japan, 
by Alexander Kiralfy. New York, John Day, 1942. $2.75 


Laboriously written analysis of the reasons for Japan’s 
success, the elements of Pacific strategy, and the road to 
victory in the Far East—which, according to the author. 


lies in an attack on Japan from the north, with Russian 
assistance. 
Russia and Japan, by Maurice Hindus. Garden City, 


Doubleday, Doran, 1942. $2.00 

The author regards war between Russia and Japan as 
inevitable, and paints an optimistic picture of the power of 
Soviet resistance, even in a two-front conflict against the 
Germans and the Japanese. 


Cross Winds of Empire, by Woodburn E. 
York, John Day, 1941. $3.00 


An interesting descriptive-narrative exposition of life 


Remington. New 


= 
VoL. 


The 
the 
Unit 
a re 
wor! 
B 
lowe 
just 
decl 
no s 
slacl 
the 
ship 
by « 
alre 
Aug 
lent 
unp 
Stat 
mat 
pop 
as 
nati 
was 
ing 
fort 
lard 


authoritative picture of all aspects of the country is of and peoples around the South China Sea, with prophetieftac| 
much interest and value. hints of the storm to come that broke in December 1941. Jon,¢ 

Cay 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 44, AuGust 21, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 1. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lest, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. Entered as ic 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. lan 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


is 


