





| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


/ ange Pegiation of current international events by the Research Staff 






RAL LIBRARY Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


» OF MYGMr IGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





glo. 

flu-} Yor. XVII, No. 31 May 27, 1938 
16> 

ible 


ee. Europe in Crisis, by Vera Micheles Dean . wich i 
a The Struggle Over Spain, by John C. deWilde Aun Archer. So | 
Lith- Strife in Czechoslovakia, by Karl Falk 1 
lain F.P. A. publications 25 cents each 
plo- — 

don, — a 
d by PRAGUE TURNS THE TABLES ON GERMANY 
once : 
oslo- i 


, for 
prac 
sions 
t of 
other 
afan- 


: 
bes mere authorities, and oar cerry Konrad pe the German authorities replied that these movements 1 
~ cin was at that moment conferring with Nazi of- were routine transfers of troops from winter to sum- if 
, oa ls in Germany. mer quarters. These reassurances had a hollow | 
' pris} The Czechoslovak crisis was the result of con- sound, especially since they were accompanied by | 
ntrol, | @etted action by Hitler and Mussolini, who during hysterical German agitation regarding alleged dis- \, 
the Rome conversations had apparently decided to order in Czechoslovakia, similar to that which had : 
AN “| continue their policy of seeking respective spheres of preceded the entrance of German troops into Austria. ! 
influence in Central Europe and the Mediterranean. The Prague government, undeterred by British 
The first step in this program had been I/ Duce’s counsels of moderation, refused to take the risk of 1 
terna-| Délligerent speech at Genoa on May 14, when he becoming another Austria and turned the tables on \ 
d with} indicated the difficulty of reaching an agreement Germany. The immediate result was not a warlike i 
with France unless French assistance to the Spanish move on the part of Germany, as had often been pre- i 
Theon| Loyalists was immediately discontinued. General dicted in London, but a noticeable abatement of i 
76 : Franco, confronted with unexpectedly stubborn Loy- German hysteria. The first set of municipal elections \\ 
inal alist resistance, was reported to have asked Italy for —which are to be completed on May 29 and ii 
y num-| additional men and material. Mussolini, possibly un- June 12 — were held on Sunday without any dis- | 
willing to imperil the Anglo-Italian agreement by turbance in 1,500 municipalities, only 48 of which 
Tum )tesh assistance to Franco, was apparently planning are predominantly German. They resulted generally 
ss mat} 10 make France the scapegoat for prolongation of in a swing to the Right in German towns, where the 








ady For accurate and unbiased information on the 


European situation, read: 











General Library 


University of Michigan 














ge HE dramatic decision of the Prague government 

on May 21 to mobilize 400,000 regular and 
feserve troops for the purpose of maintaining public 
order, threatened by Nazi agitation on the eve of 
municipal elections, took the wind out of Germany's 
sails and staved off, for the time being, the danger 
of aGerman putsch in Czechoslovakia. This mobiliza- 
tion, which showed that Prague was in complete 


-! control of the situation, was carried out with ex- 


emplary promptness and efficiency during a day of 
serious tension, while the German press and radio 
were whipping up popular excitement regarding a 
border incident at Eger, in which two Sudeten Ger- 
mans had been killed by Czech border guards. It 
came as a complete surprise for the Sudeten Ger- 
mans, who had been increasingly defiant of the 


the Spanish conflict, thus driving a wedge between 
France and Britain. This impression was strength- 











ened by reports that Italy would stage air maneuvers 
in Libya, on the frontier of Tunis, which has an 
Italian population of 90,000 and might offer Mus- 
solini the territorial advantages he failed to obtain 
under the Anglo-Italian deal. Simultaneously the 
French government, nettled by Mussolini's policy, 
announced that it would recruit troops in Tunis, 
which has recently suffered from native unrest some- 
times attributed to Italian propaganda, and would 
hold naval maneuvers off the Tunisian coast. 


While France and Britain were busy unraveling 
the fresh complications created by Mussolini’s Genoa 
speech, European tension was suddenly increased on 
May 20 by rumors of German troop movements in 
the direction of the Czech frontier. In reply to per- 
sistent inquiries by the British Ambassador in Berlin, 


Henlein party failed to poll as many votes as had 
been expected; a trend to the Left in Czech com- 











































th 
i 
i 





























munities; and a gain for the Czech National Socialist 
party, slightly Left of center, to which President 
Benes belonged before he became chief executive. 


Czechoslovakia’s mobilization showed that, in an 
emergency, a democratic country may move no less 
rapidly and decisively than a totalitarian state. It 
also demonstrated, regrettable as it may seem, that 
countries menaced by German aggression must, at 
least temporarily, take a leaf out of the Nazi book 
and use repressive measures against their opponents. 
The surprise which Czechoslovakia’s move caused 
in Berlin must have been paralleled in London, 
where the Chamberlain government only a few days 
before had been urging Prague to make all conces- 
sions “compatible with the security of the state.” 
If Mr. Chamberlain had cherished the hope that 
Germany would move as swiftly in Czechoslovakia 
as in Austria, thus precluding the possibility of an 
open conflict which might involve France and Brit- 
ain, this hope was dashed by Prague, which clearly 
showed its intention to resist any German attempt 
to break up the Czechoslovak state. The very prompt- 
ness with which the British cabinet met on Sunday 
to discuss the resulting situation indicates that 
Britain cannot remain indifferent to the fate of the 
Czechs, much as it would prefer to avoid conflict in 
Eastern Europe. Prague’s action stiffened Britain’s 
attitude toward Germany, which received due warn- 
ing that Czechoslovakia would not be permitted to 
become another Belgium. This British warning may 
in turn give fresh courage to countries like Poland 
and Hungary, also menaced by German expansion. 


Is Hitler ready to risk war for the sake of absorb- 
ing 3,500,000 Sudeten Germans into the Third 
Reich? The balance of informed opinion inclines to 
the belief that Germany is neither ready for a major 
war, nor anxious to provoke it. Hitler's technique so 
far has been to obtain his objectives by threat of 
force. If he was bluffing on Czechoslovakia, his bluff 
has been royally called. Yet Czechoslovakia cannot 
remain permanently mobilized against the incipient 
danger of German attack or Sudeten revolt. A solu- 
tion — unfortunately too long postponed after the 
World War — must be found for the Sudeten Ger- 
man problem. The first step in that direction would 
be a conciliatory move on the part of Henlein who, 
encouraged by hope of British non-interference in 
Czechoslovakia, had rejected in advance the nation- 
alities statute drafted by Prague. Henlein may have 
made such a move on May 23 when he had a three- 
hour interview with Premier Hodza. Now that 
Czechoslovakia has shown its strength, it is in a better 
position than before to offer concessions to its vari- 
ous component nationalities. But it should be made 
clear to Germany beyond peradventure of a doubt 
that, once these concessions have been effected, any 


Page Two 








— 
— 


attempt to invade Czechoslovakia or break it up by 
Nazi-inspired agitation from within will meet with 
resistance not only on the part of Prague, but also 
of France and Britain. Hitler. said in one of his tr. 
umphal speeches in Austria that God helps him who 
helps himself. This maxim may prove true for 
Czechoslovakia, which during the past week has 
demonstrated its willingness to negotiate, but not to 


commit national suicide. VERA MICHELES DEAN 
JAPAN WINS AT HSUCHOW 


Japan’s triumph of May 20 at Hsiichow, strategic 
railway junction in northern Kiangsu province, cul. 
minates a five months’ campaign. The drive agains 
the Chinese defenses north and south of this ci 
was originally launched at the end of December, 
shortly after the fall of Nanking. Hostilities on the 
Hsiichow front were protracted far beyond the cal. 
culations of Japan’s high command and involved 4 
heavy cost in men, money and supplies. The victory 
now attained, moreover, is marred by memory of the 
serious military reverse suffered at Taierhchuang on 
April 6. 

Despite these qualifications, the occupation of 
Hsiichow is an important gain to the cause of Jap 
anese arms in China. It came at a moment when the 
whole campaign of military conquest was threaten 
ing to develop into an ignominious stalemate. One 
of its results will probably be at least nominal unifi 
cation of the Japanese-occupied territories in north. 
ern and central China, with direct Japanese control 
of the railway lines from Peiping to Nanking. The 
Chinese guerrilla forces, however, may still prove « 
threat to effective functioning of the Tientsin-Pukoyw 
Railway. In any case, a considerable number of Jap- 
anese divisions must henceforth be devoted to the 
task of guarding this essential line of communica 
tions. 

Much more important military issues hi: the 
results of the struggle now being waged alongs 
Lunghai Railway. Reports of the extensive 


ALLEN 


which is taking place in the provinces adjoining thi} 


east-west trunk railway line are confused and co 
tradictory. It seems clear that Japanese accounts of 
the annihilation of 250,000 Chinese troops ait 
highly exaggerated. A safer estimate would be that 
the bulk of the Chinese armies defending Hsiichow 
made good their retreat, but not without suffering 
fairly heavy losses. Inland of Hsiichow the Japanest 
forces are consolidating their control over part of 
the Lunghai Railway, and the same process is taking 
place between Hsiichow and the sea. On the othet 
hand, a new Chinese defense line of some strength 
has apparently been established about 100 miles eas 
of Chengchow. The ultimate fate of this strategit 
junction on the Lunghai and Peiping-Hankow rail 
(Continued on Page 4) 





PS 
with 


3 tri. 
for 


Ot to 
LN 


tegic 
] cul 
AINSt 
} city 
nber, 
n the 
© cal. 


ved 4 a 


iCtory 
of the 
1g oN 


n thé 
1g the 
battle 
rg this 
d con 
ints of 
DS alt 
e that 
siichow 
ff ering 
panest 
part of 
taking 
e othe 
crength 
les east 
crategit 
yw rail 





Washington News Letter 


————— 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 23.—During the past few days, Mexico has 
again become the chief source of concern at the State 
Department. Two weeks ago, when the Cardenas 
government severed diplomatic relations with Great 
Britain, Department officials remained outwardly 
unruffied, despite the fact that this unexpected turn 
of events forced the postponement of negotiations 
for settlement of the oil controversy. More will be 
known about the possibilities of a proposal for com- 
sation when the Mexican Ambassador, Dr. Fran- 
cisco Castillo Najera, returns to Washington this 
week. But as officials await Dr. Najera, they are even 
more concerned by the spectre of civil strife than 
by the petroleum issue. Should civil war result, the 
attitude of Washington would be decisive. In such 
acase, Mr. Hull would not be likely to follow the 
precedent of Spain. While the Neutrality Act gives 
the President discretion to apply an arms embargo 
against both the government and the rebels, invoca- 
tion of the law in a Latin American revolt would 
fun counter to certain treaty obligations, under which 
the United States is pledged to forbid arms to the 
tebels alone. This is embodied in the Convention on 
Rights and Duties of States in the Event of Civil 
Strife, signed at Havana on February 20, 1928 and 
tatified by the United States on May 21, 1930. It 
obliges contracting states “to prohibit the traffic 
of arms and war material except when it is destined 
to the Government, so long as the belligerency of 
the rebels has not been recognized. . . .”” Thus, apart 
from the desire of Washington to help Cardenas 
preserve order, the Havana Convention makes it 
possible to avoid the sad precedent of Spain. 


Three Marginal Notes. Three less imrmediate— 
but not unimportant—questions of foreign policy 
under discussion here last week deserve at least a 
brief marginal note. The items cover the Philippines, 
phosphates and Pan-American cooperation. 


1. Philippines. On May 20 the Joint Preparatory 
Committee on Philippine Affairs concluded its labors 
by submitting a report which looks toward adjust- 
ment of economic relations between the United States 
and the Philippines. While the text was withheld, 
the report is not expected to contain any surprises. 
The basic plan was allowed to leak out at a White 
House press conference several months ago, and 
was confirmed by an exchange of telegrams between 
President Roosevelt and Quezon in April. It pro- 





vides that instead of assessing the full tariff duties 
on each other's products in 1946 (as laid down in 
the Independence Act), the two countries will ex- 
tend their special economic relations for another 14 
years by gradually raising duties, beginning at 25 
per cent of prevailing rates and increasing 5 per 
cent annually until the close of the year 1960. 


Political relations are not mentioned, and hence 
the necessity for a marginal note. Many informed 
observers believe that long before the plan is trans- 
lated into law, it will be swept away by political 
currents in the Far East. Recent reports from Manila 
contain fresh hints that Filipino leaders are actively 
seeking a formula to avoid breaking all political ties 
with the United States. And here in Washington, 
there are increasing indications that a plan to retain 
the Islands under some form of Dominion status 
may be formulated before the Administration goes 
out of office in 1941. In any event, the Administra- 
tion has no intention of pushing the Joint Com- 
mittee’s report at this session of Congress. 


2. Phosphates and Foreign Policy. Last Friday, 
President Roosevelt sent to Congress a special mes- 
sage urging the creation of a joint Congressional 
committee to study and recommend “a national pol- 
icy” for the conservation of phosphates. On the 
surface this message appeared quite innocuous and 
entirely unrelated to foreign policy. But behind the 
message there apparently lay a double purpose: first, 
to develop government production and distribution 
of cheap fertilizer; second, to lay the basis for gov- 
ernment control of the export of phosphates so that 
this vital commodity might be used eventually as 
an important economic sanction. A possible key to 
the purpose behind the President's move is found 
in the last annual report of the Tennessee Valley 
Authority, which contained this pertinent passage: 
“Since the lifetime of our civilization depends on 
economy in the use of this key mineral, the export 
of phosphate should be regarded as a national con- 
cern, although a satisfactory adjustment of interna- 
tional relations might well be important enough to 
justify such a sacrifice. The determination of the 
quantity and the destination of phosphate exports 
should therefore be a function of the Federal Gov- 
ernment as a matter of foreign policy.” The fol- 
lowing facts give added meaning to the President's 
message: (1) The United States possesses 40 per 
cent of the known high-grade phosphate deposits 
of the world. (2) Germany and Japan are the two 





















































Nears = ep ne + 


eae 








largest buyers of American phosphate, purchasing 
nearly half of the 1,179,000 tons exported by this 
country in 1937. 

3. Pan-American C ation. On May 17 
Frank R. McNinch, chairman of the Federal Com- 
munications Commission, went to the White House 
to confer with the President on the work of an inter- 

tal committee appointed last February to 
study international broadcasting. When he came out, 
Mr. McNinch issued a short press release stating 
that the President had instructed the committee ‘‘to 
continue its studies,” but that a report would not be 
submitted until “some time this fall.” Behind this 
noncommittal statement lies an ambitious plan to 
develop short-wave broadcasting to Latin America 
as part of a larger project for strengthening cultural 
ties between the American states. The chief issue 
in the radio field is whether the United States should 
set up its Own government station, or encourage 
private companies to develop cultural broadcasts. 
Half a dozen bills authorizing a government-owned 
radio have been introduced this session—the latest 
being a measure sponsored by Congressman Maury 
Maverick calling for an ‘Institute of Friendly Ameri- 
can Relations” to be established within the State 
Department. While the Administration has been 
cultivating Congressional interest, it has not yet 
made up its own mind on the best course of pro- 
cedure. On other aspects of the plan, more will be 
heard in the near future. W. T. STONE 


JAPAN WINS AT HSUCHOW 
(Continued from Page 2) 


ways depends on the outcome of the direct Japanese 
drive along the Lunghai and of battles north and 
south of the line in Honan and Anhwei provinces. 
Expectations that the Japanese command, following 
reduction of Hsiichow, would be satisfied to con- 
solidate control over the coastal provinces, seem to 


Page Four 











manders have vigorously followed up their recent 


successes and are apparently committed to a large F ... 


scale interior campaign, with Hankow as the ultimate 
objective. 

There is no sign that China’s morale and fighting 
ability have been seriously affected by the loss of 
Hsiichow. The Hankow leaders have viewed the 
withdrawal from this area as an episode in the mili- 
tary struggle, forced by superior Japanese strength. 
They have derived considerable satisfaction from 
the successful flight of a Chinese plane to Japan, 
where on May 20 it dropped—instead of bombs— 
anti-war messages addressed to the Japanese people. 
The Japanese authorities were unable to suppress 
news of this flight, which suggests Japan’s vulner. 
ability from the air, and reports of it appeared in 
Japanese papers side by side with news of the 
Hsiichow victory. Both at Hankow and Tokyo 
events of the past week have been interpreted as 
merely the prelude to further protracted campaign. 
ing. Optimistic statements of a speedy advance on 
Hankow issued by Japan’s military leaders are bal- 
anced off by the Chinese belief that Japanese diffi. 
culties will multiply as the invading armies march 
farther into the interior. The essential question still 
remains unanswered: Can Japan win a military con 
quest so thorough and decisive as to permit with 
drawal of the bulk of its armed forces from China? 
Unless this is quickly achieved, the costs will far 
exceed any conceivable gains. T. A. BIsson 





MRS. DEAN APPOINTED RESEARCH DIRECTOR 


In accordance with a suggestion of Mr. Buell— 
who is at present in Europe—the Board of Directors 
at its meeting on May 19 appointed Mrs. Dean as Re 
search Director of the Foreign Policy Association. 
Mrs. Dean will continue to edit research publications. 





The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


Looking Behind the Censorships, by Eugene J. Young. 
Philadelphia, Pa., J. B. Lippincott Company, 1938. $3.00 


Instead of disclosing new and startling facts or dis- 
cussing censorship in detail, the cable editor of the New 
York Times gives an able and interesting general review 
of recent diplomatic history from the viewpoint already 
familiar to readers of his earlier book, Powerful America. 


A Mirror to Geneva, by George Slocombe. New York, 
Henry Holt, 1938. $3.00 
A history of the League of Nations, written as a series 
of pen-portraits of the many statesmen involved in its 
activities. Brilliantly written by a wise and witty journal- 
ist, delightfully illustrated by Kelen of Geneva, and hand- 
somely published, the book provides an accurate and color- 


ful narrative of the rise and fall of international organi- 
zation. A chapter on “The City of Calvin” is particularly 
amusing in its verisimilitude. 


American Foreign Policy, by Wilson Leon Godshall. Ann 
Arbor, Mich., Edwards Brothers, 1937. $5.00 
This collection of readings on American foreign rela- 
tions meets a need for documentary material in college 
classes on the subject. Planned to accompany either 4 
topical or a chronological presentation of material. 


Over the North Pole, by George Baidukov. New York, 
Harcourt Brace, 1938. $1.50 
A stirring account of the first trans-Polar flight by three 
Soviet aviators who flew from Moscow to the United States 
in the summer of 1937. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 31, 





May 27, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Natios 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lestiz BUELL, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Eéifor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


aps 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


have been wide of the mark. The Japanese com} 


An 


\2\ 


tat 


ext 





