Entered as 2nd ne 
Gesera) Library 8 1945 


ey PERIGVKAL 460" 
. —1945 qgenemmat LInRaRy Valversity or ut Sie oec peateal 
UMtY, OF MICH. 7 *Chigan ie 
an 
aucennaiiill | Behan WT Ant wen H 
AN? 
1an former. , 
emis | FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
to look for | 
er than the | 
| the USS, . An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
of a sterner FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
9 reached, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
¢ Japanese | TXXIV, No. 49 SEPTEMBER 21, 1945 
> article of 
I Doula | LONG-RANGE PLANS ON JAPAN NEEDED TO ASSIST MacARTHUR 
s he deems ae the mounting discussion of American Far Arthur castigated leaders of the news industry for 
nder.” The Eastern policy one fact stands out: the Amer- abusing the latitude granted them. He accused them 
‘formed on | jcan public is largely convinced that the defeat of of coloring the news, engaging in destructive criti- 
me that re Japan does not mean the end of Tokyo’s aggressive cism of the Allies, and giving the impression that 
ing Allies. | aspirations. It is true that Japan will soon be con- we have been negotiating with the Japanese govern- 
id on Sep- | fined to its home islands, standing alone without the ment. On the latter point he declared emphatically: 
| necessary means of waging war, and hemmed in geographically ‘The Supreme Commander will dictate orders to the 
t’’ and that | by the world’s two leading powers, the United Japanese government. He will not negotiate with it.” 
or Japan. States and Russia. But there is widespread feeling, HOW LONG AN OCCUPATION? These state- 
thur ina \ derived partly from our experience with Germany ments indicate General MacArthur’s agreement with 
e Supreme | after World War I, that purely technical measures the American press and public in finding recent Jap- 
ead of “te. F directed at Japan's war-making capacity will have to anese propaganda disturbing and repugnant. Un- 
ed Nations | be accompanied by fundamental changes in Japan’s doubtedly the actions he has already taken will be 
militaristic | social, economic and political structure if there is to followed by other essential technical measures, such 
; would be | bea chance of lasting peace. as the dissolution of the Japanese General Staffs and 
.0t_ comply U.S. POLICY STIFFENS. It is evident that our the War and Navy Ministries, as soon as these steps 
nese econ- | grip on Japan is not yet strong enough to allow us are feasible. What is still unclear, despite reports 
t necessary | complete freedom of action for, as General Mac- of plans for reeducating the Japanese, is the long- 
Vations.” | Arthur emphasized on September 14, the occupa- range character of American policy—whether the 
POLICY. | tion is in its first stage. With only a portion of our United States will be satisfied simply to disarm Japan 
10 direct- | troops ashore and large numbers of Japanese soldiers technically or will seek far-reaching alterations in 
al General | still armed, the need to safeguard the American forces Japanese society, such as are envisaged in Germany. 
»ve, which | has been a major consideration. On the other hand, The length of American occupation of Japan will 
the course perhaps partly as a result of growing American con- be a major and possibly a decisive determinant of 
of a stern | cern over the maneuvers of Premier Higashi-Kuni’s policy, for it is clear that only a superficial demilitar- 
1 some de- = régime, General MacArthur has taken strong meas- ization could be carried out in a brief period. It is 
try respect’ | ures in recent days, stressing that “the surrender now four and a half months since the defeat of 
| hundred | terms are not soft, and they will not be applied in Germany, but the process of reorganizing that coun- 
quired for | kid-glove fashion.” try is still in its early stages, so great are the prob- 
icy, which He has ordered the dissolution of Imperial Gen- lems that face the occupying powers. The fact that 
f the army | ¢tal Headquarters and the notorious Black Dragon the trials of the top Nazi war criminals may not begin 
ps irksome Society, has imposed sharp restrictions on the Jap- for some time suggests the difficulties before us 
ion dutyin | nese press and radio, and has ordered the newspapers in both Europe and Asia. In Japan, to be sure, our 
; can find | to publish accounts of Japanese war atrocities so that burden is somewhat lighter than in Germany, be- 
educes the } the civilian population may know some of the crimes cause we do not have to build a government from the 
whose bel- | ‘Ommitted in its name. The arrest of the first group ground up, but the existence of the Japanese admin- 
during the | of war criminals is being carried through, and on istrative structure with its own ingrained tendencies 
September 15 an Army spokesman for General Mac- may increase the difficulty of reaching our objectives. 
BOLLES Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


It is only natural for the American troops in Japan 
to be eager to return home, and General MacArthur 
has indicated that in.the next six months many of 
them will do so. But the American people have paid 
heavily for Japanese aggression and there is no 
reason to doubt their willingness to meet the far 
smaller cost of occupying Japan long enough to 
make victory stick. A carefully coordinated policy of 
explaining our aims to our troops in Japan, provid- 
ing adequately for their participation in achieving 
these purposes, and looking after their personal well- 
being, should result in satisfactory morale. 

WHERE SHOULD POLICY BE MADE? Recent 
events in Korea suggest that the issue of control 
of occupation policy also requires discussion. When 
the first American forces landed in southern Korea 
on September 9, the commanding officer, Lieut.-Gen. 
John R. Hodge, stated that for lack of any alterna- 
tive the Japanese administration would be main- 
tained from the Governor-General down. Subse- 
quently, protest demonstrations broke out in Seoul, 
the Korean capital, and considerable criticism was 
expressed in this country. On September 12 President 


Page Two 


es 
———— 


Truman declared that the decision had been made 
entirely by the theater commander. On the same 
day General Hodge announced that both the Goy. 
ernor-General and the Japanese director of the police 
bureau had been removed. 

It is obvious that at the moment of the landing 
General Hodge was in no position to replace the 
Japanese administration. But it is equally clear from 
the speedy removal, after protest, of the two Jap. 
anese officials most objectionable to the Koreans 
that the situation could have been avoided had there 
been adequate direction from Washington. General 
MacArthur has carried out his occupation assign. 
ment effectively and has shown a commendable in. 
terest in the reactions of the American public. But it 
seems unfair and generally undesirable to expect 
him to develop on the spot policies that require 
long-range planning. While the Supreme Command. 
er needs a considerable degree of freedom to exercise 
his own judgment, his responsibilities would be eased 
and his usefulness increased if he received a greater 
measure of guidance from home. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


WILL DIVERGENT ECONOMIC VIEWS UNDERMINE U.S.-BRITISH UNITY? 


While the agenda of the current Anglo-American 
economic conference in Washington includes such 
technical subjects as lend-lease termination, loans, 
and commercial policy, there are several underlying 
questions which must be canvassed if any agreement 
reached for aid to Britain is to prove acceptable either 
to Congress or the British Labor government. Since 
Britain's present economic crisis is a direct result of 
the war, the question arises whether the United 
States has a moral responsibility to aid the British 
economy at this time. In so far as this query involves 
a judgment on sharing wat costs, it applies not only 
to Britain but also to France, Russia and other 
United Nations now facing serious food shortages 
or other economic difficulties. In addition, however, 
it may be asked whether there are reasons based 
purely on self-interest—economic or political—which 
make it necessary for the United States to devise 
some peacetime plan similar to the lend-lease ar- 
rangements to facilitate Britain’s economic recon- 
struction. 

For many Americans the question of aid to Britain 
is complicated by the fact that the British govern- 
ment is pledged to a program of social-economic re- 
construction which is considerably further left than 
any policy now favored in the United States. Fears 
about Labor’s program of socialization were voiced 
in Congress the moment the Anglo-American talks 
began. On September 11, for example, Representa- 
tive Knutson, Republican of Minnesota, stated that 
it was inconceivable that “President Truman and the 
Congress will permit billions to be taken out of the 
American Treasury and given to foreign countries 


to be used for expropriation of privately owned and 
operated property, especially in view of the depleted 
condition of our own Treasury.” 


MORAL DUTY AND SELF-INTEREST. The | 


most cursory review of the difficulties encountered 
over the war-debt controversy resulting from World 
War I should warn us against any attempt to strike 
an exact balance of war costs shared in a military 
coalition effort. President Truman’s assurance that 
America would not expect a cash repayment for the 
lend-lease outlay of $42 billion indicates that we 
have learned a lesson from the inter-war experience. 


In the original lend-lease contract, the United States | 


recognized Britain’s sacrifices in its two-year struggle 
against the Axis before we entered the war, and ad- 
mittedly purchased our own defense by that act. What 
is more important now, in view of the question cur- 
rently raised about our responsibility in continuing 
aid to Britain, is that the master lend-lease agree- 
ments provided terms of settlement which strike a 
neat balance between moral obligations and self- 
interest. 

Just as lend-lease was based on recognition of 
mutual interests, an adjustment of the economic 
problems resulting from the war must be made on 
the basis of mutual advantage. Properly understood, 
such an adjustment involves no new moral decisions. 
For the terms of the lend-lease contract suggest 4 
settlement which seeks to increase trade and rais¢ 


world economic standards. Britain’s economy, which , 


was in large part devoted to war purposes, must now 
be revamped and expanded. This will prove doubly 
difficult because a major portion of Britain’s foreign 


——— 


jnvestm< 
order tc 
longer < 
ferences 
its impc 
people « 
of livin 
which t 
eration 
continu: 
strictior 


} especial 


| 
| 


It mu: 
nership. 
exceller 
tion th 
1919. § 
alike, i 
ference: 
wat pel 
the cha 
but it 1 
tion an 
or econ 
States | 
The U 
lems, s 
of succ 
about : 

FEA 


| mental 


we fea 
dent T 


ernmet 


quite t 


fear et 


The Vi 
Day, 
The 

1943-44 

fense < 


litical | 


Docum 
June 
Carr 
Sixt 

readily 

ica heg 


* Generc 


Goel 

A b 
nine ( 
States 
—_— 
FOREIG 
Headqua 
second-c 
one mor 


=> 


——— 
———<—<$<—<—2 


been made 
1 the same 
h the Gov. 
f the police 


the landing | 
replace the 

Clear from | 
ie two Jap- 
1€ Koreans 
d had thete 
mn. General 
ion assign. 
endable = | 
iblic. But it 

- to expect 

nat require | 
Command. | 
to exercise | 
Id be eased | 
d a greater | 


.OSINGER 


JNITY? 
owned and 
1e depleted 


LEST. The | 
ncountered 
‘om World 
rt to strike 
a military 
irance that 
ent for the 
2s that we 
experience. 
ited States 
ar struggle 
ar, and ad- 
t act. What 
lestion cur- 
continuing 
sase agree- , 
ch strike a 
and self- 


gnition of 
economic , 

e made on 

inderstood, 

| decisions. 
suggest a 

- and raise 

my, which | 

, must now 

ove doubly 

n’s foreign 


— Page Three 


investments was liquidated in the war years in 
order to finance the military effort. Funds are no 
longer available abroad by which the necessary dif- 
ferences between the country’s export receipts and 
its import needs can be balanced. Yet the British 
eople are intent on materially raising their standard 
of living. And unless conditions are provided in 
which the nation’s economy may expand in coop- 
eration with other nations, Britain may be forced to 
continue and increase its preferential trading re- 
strictions which American business finds irksome, 
especially in the sterling-area countries. 

It must be hoped that the United States-British part- 
nership, having weathered a coalition war with such 
excellent results, can avoid the kind of disintegra- 
tion that befell a similar Anglo-French alliance in 
1919. Since our political aims are in many ways 
alike, it will be all the more tragic if economic dif- 
ferences prevent continued cooperation in the post- 
wat period. Such at understanding need not take on 
the character of an exclusive Anglo-American bloc, 
but it is only realistic to admit that wider coopera- 
tion among the United Nations, either in political 
or economic affairs, can hardly succeed if the United 
States and Britain are to pursue opposing policies. 
The United Nations conference on economic prob- 
lems, so often proposed, would have scant chance 
of success if the present negotiations do not bring 
about substantial results. 

FEAR OF LABOR’S PROGRAM. The funda- 
mental question asked by many Americans is, Need 
we fear Labor's program of nationalization? Presi- 
dent Truman’s answer that Britain’s choice of gov- 
emmment is entirely a domestic British issue, while 
quite true, will hardly allay the qualms of those who 
fear encroachments on free enterprise in America. 


THE F.P.A. 


The Vigil of a Nation, by Lin Yutang. New York, John 
Day, 1945. $2.75 
The story of the author’s six months’ trip to China in 
1943-44. A combination of chapters on travel and a de- 
fense of the Chungking government’s position in its po- 
litical and military conflict with the Chinese Communists. 


Documents on American Foreign Relations, July 1948- 
June 1944, edited by Leland M. Goodrich and Marie J. 
Carroll. Boston, World Peace Foundation, 1945. $3.75 
Sixth volume in a most valuable series which makes 

readily accessible documents that really show how Amer- 

ica heads toward the post-war world. 


Generals in the White House, by Dorothy B. and Julius 
Goebel, Jr. Garden City, Doubleday, Doran, 1945. $2.75 
A brief survey of the military and political careers of 


— Generals who have been Presidents of the United 
tates. 


ae 


Characteristic socialist statements made in England 
by some of Labor’s spokesmen who foretell the end 
of capitalism will not go unheeded here. Moreover, 
given common economic practices founded on the 
common structure of Anglo-American law, changes 
in Britain’s economic system will be readily under- 
stood by Americans in a way similar changes in less 
familiar countries might not be understood. Our 
very ability fully to grasp the changes Labor intends 
to make in an economic system so nearly like our own 
may be turned to our advantage if meantime we are 
not impeded by self-engendered fears. 

Just as several individual states in America have 
proved laboratories of social experimentation, Brit- 
ain provides a test case which may prove of value to 
us. It is noteworthy that the recent election victory 
in Britain brings labor to power for the first time 
fully supported by a large majority in an industrial 
nation of the first rank which is both highly skilled 
technologically and possesses a tried and honest civil 
service. Heretofore socialist plans have been under- 
taken either in small or economically backward na- 
tions. Neither situation has offered an example to 
the United States. Britain’s experiment, at a time 
when extensive social benefits are being urged for 
all citizens in this country, is of urgent interest to the 
United States.. If it is realized that our own system 
is a mixed economy increasingly concerned with 
problems of social welfare, then the British experi- 
ment need not prove an obstacle to American aid. 
For British Laborites are operating within a tradi- 
tional political framework of democratic procedures 
and liberties which we share, and their proposed eco- 
nomic structure differs from our own only in degree. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


(The second of two articles.) 


BOOKSHELF 


The Real Soviet Russia, by David Dallin. New Haven, 
Yale University Press, 1944. $3.50 
An analysis of the character of the Russian govern- 
ment, secret police, army and Communist party by one of 
the leading critics of the Soviet régime. 


Strangers in India, by Penderel Moon. New York, Reynal 
and Hitchcock, 1945. $2.00 
A refreshing account based on the author’s experiences 
as an English official in the Indian Civil Service. Mr. 
Moon brings out the sense of frustration felt by English- 
men who realize that British conceptions are not suitable 
to Indian conditions. 


Canada and the Fight for Freedom, by W. L. Mackenzie 
King. New York, Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1944. $2.75 
This volume contains the more important speeches of 


the Prime Minister of Canada delivered between Septem- 
ber 1941 and June 1944. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 49, SEPTEMBER 21, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MICHELES Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
S181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


1918- 


PUBLIC DISTURBED BY CONFUSED POLICY ON FEEDING EUROPE 


In his statement of September 17, answering 
queries raised by a number of national organizations, 
President Truman—contradicting a previous state- 
ment by Secretary Anderson about food—said that 
both ships and supplies (with the notable exception 
of sugar, fats and oil) are available, but that satis- 
factory financial arrangements remain to be made 
with individual paying governments and with 
UNRRA, adding: “This does not mean that it may 
not become necessary to resume ration controls of 
certain items if they become so short in supply that 
such controls are required to insure more equitable 
distribution."” The American people, once they are 
acquainted with the grim facts of near-starvation in 
Allied countries, will unquestionably agree with the 
President that “it is an American responsibility not 
only to our friends, but to ourselves,” to see that the 
job of feeding “is done and done quickly.” But the 
only way that this can apparently be done is if we 
supply food on a basis other than cash. 


AMERICAN RESPONSIBILITY TO HELP. The 
President has the political choice now of asking the 
American public to go on accepting enforced re- 
strictions in its diet or of disappointing the hopes 
he has raised abroad. The only assurance that a share 
of our foodstuffs will be diverted to hungry foreign 
nations is the uninterrupted application of ration 
and price controls. The extensive needs of other 
countries for imports from the United States call for 
an orderly distribution that cannot be arranged if 
buyers here and abroad are competing without re- 
striction for available supplies. Individual western 
European countries want to make purchases of food 
in this country. Britain must obtain by purchase or 
loan a quantity of food equal at least to the amount 
it was receiving under lend-lease until that service 
was terminated on August 21. UNRRA is buying 
food here for distribution in southern and central 
Europe, as well as certain Far Eastern areas. On 
August 30, moreover, General Dwight D. Eisen- 
hower said it will be necessary to export food from 
the United States to feed Germany this winter. 

In the face of these varied calls on the larder of 
the United States, conflicting statements of govern- 
ment officials have thrown both Americans and for- 
eigners into confusion concerning the Administra- 
tion’s intentions. Secretary Anderson has consistently 
discouraged expectations of filling foreign require- 
ments, while diplomatic spokesmen like former Un- 
der Secretary of State Grew have said that it is vitally 
necessary to come as close as possible to filling them. 


Secretary Anderson on July 12 declared the United | 
States ‘‘cannot feed the world,” although, he added, 

we must share what we can with the peoples of the 

liberated lands ‘“‘until such time as their new harvests 

will make it possible for them again to feed them. | 
selves.” In explanation of the limited contribution | 
that this country could make, he pointed out, “we 
are eating into our reserve stocks of meat, poultry, 
eggs, sugar, lard and canned goods.’ On September 
14, when he announced that he would seek an end 
to controls on citrus fruits, the country, according to 
government reports, had an excess of many foods, 
and the Federal government was releasing from ware. 
houses 3,000,000 cases of canned fruits and 6,000, 
000 cases of canned vegetables to civilian purchasers, 


DESPERATE NEED ABROAD. On September — guarant 
15 the Office of War Information reported that the | States a 
liberated areas of Europe desperately need 12,000; | of its 
000 tons of foodstuff imports in order to prevent 
widespread starvation this winter. European food | curious 
production is 10 per cent below the levels of 1935-37, | Allied 
and transportation troubles make impossible the | 
most useful distribution of what is produced. The | and N. 
United States, on the other hand, is producing far to fulf 
in excess of pre-war normal, and is the chief poten- | ment 
tial source of supply. The Soviet Union, which itself | MacA: 
is seeking aid from the United States in other foods, | occupa 
has exported grain for relief to Rumania, Yugo-| will p 
slavia and Poland; and Sweden is developing a pro-| a size 
gram of assistance to liberated countries. Canada, | jected 
which with the United States is the chief supplier of } compl 
UNRRA, has announced the restoration of meat fa- | forces 
tioning. to Jap 

The OWI report disclosed that UNRRA has been | demar 
so unsuccessful in filling its relief food needs for _ of all 
Europe that Director General Herbert H. Lehman = abroa 
has had to lower from 2,650 to 2,000 the calories he | would 
hoped to provide daily to UNRRA beneficiaries. RE! 
Lehman in June estimated his meat needs for the final officig 
six months of 1945 at 725,000,000 pounds, but he Unite 
has obtained deliveries on only 44,000,000. During dome 
a visit to Washington in July the French Ministet  abroa 
of Food Supply, Christian Pineau, said that the cur dike 
rent French ration averaged 1,500 calories a day, Of | the 
less than the famishing quantities supplied by the | Toky 
Japanese to American prisoners of war. The Ameft | that | 
can public wants not only the facts about the dite | Supr 
food situation in Europe and Asia but an opportunity | indic 
to take action commensurate with the urgency of the | also 
crisis described by President Truman. exper 

BLAIR BOLLES 


F 


Vou. XX 


A’; 


a peace 


action | 


of requ 


