tal price 
ary “to 
‘he need 
increas- 
ice rises 
939, the 
holesale 
ent, and 
spite re- 
omy and 
osed on 
ises, the 
> control 
r profits 
bill sig- 
on any 
cent of 
rchasing 
or the 
dity on 
rm. bloc 
rises on 
ssion to 
d_ public 
is of the 
ries may 
ay have 
ill, they 
e faced. 
time ef- 
ective— 
fructure. 
LIOTT 


» bi5n0Dp vs 


+  , Entered as 2nd class matter 
“<= 


atk Maas 


AUG 19 194 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


AvucustT 15, 1941 


OLLOWING the economic penalties imposed on 

Japan in recent weeks, stimulated by the latter's 
military occupation of southern Indo-China under 
agreement with the Vichy authorities, severe tension 
has continued to prevail in the Far East. The possi- 
bility of imminent Japanese moves against Thailand 
was suggested by the special Australian Cabinet meet- 
ing which met on August 11 at Melbourne. Declar- 
ing that the Pacific situation was “more full of danger 
than ever,” Robert G. Menzies, the Australian Prime 
Minister, cut short a tour of the western and south- 
em provinces to attend the emergency session of the 
Cabinet. At the same time William M. Hughes, 
Australian Navy Minister, stated: ‘““Whether there 
is to be peace or war in the Pacific is for Japan to de- 
cide. The situation has deteriorated, but it is none of 
our doing. We want peace, but we are inflexibly re- 
solved to defend our interests, which march side by 
side with those of Britain.” 

These statements from Australian officials under- 
lined reports from London that ‘‘current British- 
American discussions” were expected to lead to the 
strongest warning ever addressed to Japan by a group 
of great powers. The Japanese government has 
carried economic mobilization a step further by en- 
forcing additional provisions of the National Mo- 
) bilization Act, while Kaname Wakusugi, aide to 
Ambassador Nomura at Washington, has prefaced a 
first-hand report which he is carrying to Japan with a 
telephoned message from California warning Tokyo 
oficialdom that the United States was prepared to 
apply counter-measures “according to each step that 
japan makes.”’ 

JAPAN’S SOUTHWARD DRIVE. Since the oc- 
cupation of southern Indo-China was completed early 
this month, Japan has made few additional overt 
Moves. Japanese troops and war supplies have been 
landed in considerable force at Saigon, fortifications 
and gun emplacements have been set up on Cap St. 


DIPLOMATIC WARFARE CENTERS ON THAILAND 


Jacques, at the entrance of the Saigon estuary, and 
work on development of the naval base in Cam Ranh 
Bay to the north has begun. On the other hand, the 
dispositions cf certain of the Japanese forces have 
suggested an attempt to overawe Thailand or, if this 
should fail, an intention to invade the country. 
Strong Japanese military and air force contingents 
have been stationed at, strategic points along the 
southern Thailand-Indo-China border which afford 
the easiest lines of entry into Thailand. A force of 
130 Japanese vessels is said to be concentrated at 
Hainan Island. Reports, thus far unconfirmed by ac- 
tual evidence, have stated that Japan has presented 
demands to the Thai authorities, including a request 
for permission to occupy strategic bases in Thailand 
and for a virtual trade monopoly. 

Confronted with increasing pressure from Tokyo, 
the Thailand government has tended to move with 
some degree of caution, although the indications are 
that it is not playing the part of a Japanese pawn. 
Thailand authorities have made two recent conces- 
sions to Japan: the recognition of Manchoukuo, and 
the extensign of a credit of 15 million yen to facili- 
tate extensive Japanese trade purchases. Balancing 
these concessions, however, Thailand declared in an 
official communiqué, issued on July 29, that its for- 
eign policy rested on a program of “independence, 
self-reliance, equal friendship for all nations, and 
unrestricted foreign trade.” This statement was sup- 
ported by the dispatch of additional tank and aerial 
units of the Thai army to the Indo-China frontier, 
only a few miles distant from the newly arrived 
Japanese troops. 

ANGLO-AMERICAN MOVES. The concern of 
the British and American governments over Japan’s 
intentions toward Thailand was made explicit on 
August 6 in direct warnings to Tokyo expressed in 
London and Washington. Anthony Eden, British 
Foreign Secretary, declared before the House of 


Commons that Japanese intervention in Thailand 
would “give rise to a most serious situation between 
Great Britain and Japan.” Secretary Hull, in reply to 
a correspondent’s query, indicated a few hours later 
in Washington that the American government was 
“becoming increasingly concerned” about develop- 
ments threatening Thailand. 

While these warnings were moderate in tone, there 
was increasing evidence that a Japanese move against 
Thailand might encounter more than economic pen- 
alties. Formal assurances of Anglo-American aid to 
Thailand in the event of a Japanese attack have not 
been publicly offered, but reports indicate that such 
pledges have been made through diplomatic chan- 
nels. Thailand's original statement affirming the 
complete independence of its foreign policy was re- 
emphasized on August 7, although certain Bangkok 
political sources intimated that the country would 
welcome British-American assurances counter-balanc- 
ing Japanese aspirations. The week-end of August 9- 
10 was featured in Bangkok by an emergency Cabinet 
meeting and intense diplomatic activity in which the 
American Minister was prominent. 

Aside from diplomatic activity, it seems clear that 
Britain and the United States are making concrete 
preparations to deal with any eventuality that may 
develop in southeast Asia. There is some doubt as to 
the accuracy of the report from Saigon that a British 
naval squadron, headed by the 30,600-ton Wars pite, 
had been sighted in the Gulf of Siam. There can be 
no question, however, that large additional reinforce- 
ments for the already formidable British land, air 
and naval defenses of Malaya reached Singapore 
early in August, and it is possible that these may in- 
clude naval vessels in the battleship category. Two 
American cruisers, the Northampton and the Salt 
Lake City, also appeared at Brisbane in Australia dur- 
ing the second week of August. Meanwhile, Japan’s 
trade with the United States, the British Empire and 
the Dutch East Indies had been largely brought to a 
halt by continued maintenance of the “freezing” 
orders issued during July. Another executive order, 


GERMANS SEEK DECISION IN THE UKRAINE 


Although exact information concerning the Russo- 
Germar war is still difficult to obtain from the conflict- 


' 


How has Britain met the impact of total war? This Report, 
the second of two on wartime changes in Britain, surveys 
social welfare measures, the effect of heavy taxation, the 
rcle of Parliament, civil liberty and party politics. Read: 


SOCIAL AND POLITICAL CHANGES 
IN WARTIME BRITAIN 
by James Frederick Green 


25¢ 


August 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Page Two 


a 
issued by President Roosevelt on August 1, has alsg 
further restricted Japan’s possible oil purchases in the 
United States even should the former's assets be yp. 
frozen. The new order, in effect, prohibited exports 
of aviation gasoline (presumably to well below g7 
octane content) to aggressor nations, and limited ex 
ports of crude petroleum to usual or pre-war quan 
tities on a licensing basis. 


THE WAR OF NERVES. Further measures, both 
of a military and economic nature, may be instituted 
against Japan following conclusion of the mysterio 
“British-American discussions” which are apparently 
taking place. These measures would be primarily mo. 
tivated by an effort to prevent Japan from invading 
Thailand, although they might also be intended to 
dissuade Japan from taking action against the Soviet 
Union in the north, where large reinforcements of 
Japanese troops have been sent into Manchoukuo. 

Occupation of Thailand by Tokyo’s forces would | 
present far greater dangers to British-American. 
Chinese defense positions than the presence of Jap. 
anese troops in Indo-China. It would open the way to 
a land offensive down the Malayan peninsula toward 
Singapore—an action which would be necessary in 
order to supplement a serious naval attack on Brit } 
ain’s great Far Eastern base. It would also bring 
Japanese bombers within easy striking distance of the 
Burma rail and river routes along which supplies to 
China must pass before reaching the Yunnan-Burma 
Road, and open southwestern China to more direct 
attack. In the present case, however, there seems less 
chance that Japan can effect a “‘peaceful’’ occupation 
by agreement, such as occurred in Indo-China. If 
Thailand chooses to resist, Tokyo must assume the 


——— 


risks of outright aggression. Under existing condi 
tions, such a move might precipitate the general Far | 
Eastern conflict that has been brewing since the Jap- 


anese occupation of Manchuria a decade ago. It re |! 


mains to be seen whether Japan is prepared to risk | 
overt action in Thailand—and, if so, whether Britain 
and the United States are prepared to offer effective 
opposition. T. A. Bisson 


ing and propagandistic communiqués issued by both | 
sides, the German campaign, which had stalled for 
several weeks, now seems again to be gathering mo 
mentum. The drive toward Moscow appears to have | 
made no progress despite the victorious conclusion of 
the battle of Smolensk which the Germans reported 
on August 6; but in the northwest German troops | 
have resumed their advance toward Leningrad, and 
in the south they are penetrating deep into the 
Ukraine. A strong German army has passed south 
of Kiev, aiming at Dniepropetrovsk and the heart of 
Ukrainian industry. Near the Black Sea other Nazi 


— 


_—— 


forces ¢ 
600,004 
Nikola 

RICI 
page 
Russiat 


over a 
gan re 
tandst 
As the 
en Ge: 
simistic 
Rumor 
nersiste 
that th 
ings, if 
tion we 
mand ° 
favorak 


in the 

collabo 
now th 
the brit 
the Ret 


| against 


selled ; 
mg “cc 
In the - 
and th 
cramer 
handec 
gust 6 | 
of defe 


— 


FOREIGN 
Headquart 
catered as 


TD» 18 


L, has also 
ases in 
ets be un. 
d exports 
below 97 
imited ex. 
wat q 
ures, both 
instituted 
mysterious | 
apparently 
narily mo 
1 inva 
tended to 
the Soviet 
ements of 
oukuo. 
ces would 
American- 
ce of Jap. 
the way to 
ila toward 
cessary in 
k on Brit- 
also bring 
nee of the 
upplies to 
1an-Burma 
ore direct 
seems less 
»ccupation 
‘China. If 
ssume the 
ing condi- 
eneral Far 
e the Jap- 
ago. It re- 
ed to risk 
rer Britain 
r effective 
BISSON 


d by both 
talled for 
ering mo 
rs to have 


forces are threatening the big port of Odessa with its 
0,000 inhabitants and the Russian naval base at 
Nikolaev. 
RICHES OF THE UKRAINE. The Ukrainian cam- 
in may well prove to be the turning point in the 
Russian war and put into Hitler’s hands the rich prize 


i } j¢ has long coveted. Despite Soviet attempts to de- 


gnttalize industry and production, the Ukraine still 

a predominant rdéle in Russia's economy. It ac- 
gunts for over half of the iron and steel produced in 
he U.S.S.R., about 70 per cent of the aluminum and 
igticultural machinery, almost 70 per cent of the 
ugar and more than a fifth of the grain. Its heavy 
dustries are well nigh indispensable to a continued 
yar effort. 


The new German successes, if confirmed and con- 
tisued, would have far-reaching consequences. In the 
Reich they would presumably help to allay the popu- 
lr unrest which has developed over the compara- 
ively slow progress of the Eastern campaign. The 
German people had been led to expect a quick victory 
wer a sluggish and weak opponent. The dogged Rus- 
jan resistance which battled the Reich forces to a 
tandstill caught the German populace unprepared. 
As the R.A.F. pounded cities in western and north- 
em Germany almost unmolested, many Germans pes- 
imistically envisaged a prolonged two-front war. 
humors damaging to morale began to circulate. A 
persistent flight from the mark, aggravated by reports 
that the government was about to confiscate all sav- 
ings, indicated waning confidence. While the situa- 
tion was by no means grave, the German High Com- 
mand was obviously relieved that it could report a 
favorable turn in the fortunes of war. 


VICHY PRESSED FOR DECISION. The reports 
of German victories may also weaken those elements 
n Vichy who have pursued a “‘wait-and-see’’ policy 
‘inthe hope of avoiding the necessity for complete 
| ollaboration with Nazi Germany. For several weeks 

now the government of Marshal Pétain has been on 
| thebrink of momentous decisions in its relations with 
| the Reich. The Paris press has consistently inveighed 
| ainst its “timid” and “‘vacillating” policy and coun- 

elled a complete partnership with Germany, includ- 
| tg “common defense” of France’s African Empire. 
Inthe face of strong pressure from the United States 
ind the indecisive warfare in Russia the Vichy gov- 
tment has hesitated to commit itself. In a note 


clusion of landed to Ambassador William D. Leahy on Au- 


s reported 
an troops 
grad, and 

into the 
sed south 
e heart of 
ther Nazi 


| {ust 6 it apparently intimated that France was capable 
ifdefending its African possessions without aid, but 


Page Three 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule * 
Subject: WAR OF NERVES IN THE PACIFIC 
Speaker: T. A. Bisson 
Date: Sunday, August 17 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 

Station: NBC, blue network 


refused to give categorical assurances to this effect. 
The Germans are reported to be demanding a full- 
fledged alliance which would give them bases at Casa- 
blanca and Dakar and make France virtually an Axis 
partner, though a strictly subordinate one. In return 
the Reich would presumably release more French 
prisoners, consent to an alteration in the line demar- 
cating the occupied and unoccupied zones, and in- 
sure France an “honorable place” in the “New 
Order.” 


Although such developments would constitute a 
serious setback for Britain and the United States, they 
would not entirely offset the fact that the Russian 
campaign, in sharp contrast to the others in this war, 
have cost Germany heavy losses in men and matériel. 
In addition, the Nazis have lost valuable time. As the 
German-Soviet conflict ends its eighth week, the pros- 
pect that Germany will bring it to a successful con- 
clusion in time to launch a direct assault on the Brit- 
ish Isles this fall progressively diminishes. Mean- 
while Britain and the United States gain time to gird 
themselves for the decision which is now likely to 
come not this year, but in 1942 or later. Already the 
British, aided by the U.S. patrol in the North Atlantic, 
have managed to reduce monthly shipping losses dur- 
ing June and July to about 300,000 tons. These facts, 
however, should not give rise to any feeling of com- 
placency. Every day gained through the Russo-Ger- 
man war must be fully utilized to speed production 
and strengthen armaments if Germany is eventually 


to be defeated. JoHN C. DEWILDE 


The South American Handbook, 1941, edited by Howell 
Davies. New York, Wilson, 1941. $1.00 


One of the best sources of general information on all 
the Latin American republics, this new edition will be 
particularly welcome to commercial travelers. 


The Petroleum Industry—An Economic Survey, by Ronald 
B. Shuman, Norman, Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1940. $3.00 


A careful analysis of the economic and financial factors 
in the recent development of a key defense industry. In 
discussing conservation of oil resources, Dr. Shuman sug- 
gests that the war may extend government control over oil 
production. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 43, AuGust 15, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Dw 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Emered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


National 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Sy ee me 


; ee ee 


ee ee at ~ oe he ope eee ie Faas : 
= SS ws 


pew S = 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


AuG. 11.—The Administration’s policy of extend- 
ing economic aid to the Soviet Union brings the 
wheel of American-Russian relations full circle. After 
the revolution of March 1917, President Wilson 
promptly recognized the Provisional Government and 
continued to regard Russia as one of the “Associated 
Powers” in the war against Germany until the estab- 
lishment of the U.S.S.R. in the following November. 
The United States then embargoed the war supplies 
about to be shipped to Russia—amounting to almost 
$191 million out of credits totalling $325 million— 
and refused to recognize the Soviet régime until No- 
vember 1933. The present renewal of wartime col- 
laboration between the two countries creates a num- 
ber of difficult economic, political and strategic issues 
for the United States. 


AID TO RUSSIA. Little evidence is yet available 
to indicate the exact nature and quantity of aid which 
the Administration is planning to send the Soviet 
Union in accordance with the conversations of Harry 
Hopkins in Moscow and the Welles-Oumansky notes 
of August 2. One shipload of aviation gasoline has 
already left and at least four American tankers are 
being turned over to the Soviet government, accord- 
ing to Petroleum Coordinator Ickes on August 7. 
Numerous American-made planes on order for Brit- 
ain or already delivered, including about 100 Curtiss 
P-38 pursuit planes and some medium bombers, re- 
portedly are being released for Soviet use. Further 
assistance will have to be determined by the avail- 
ability of supplies and shipping, prior commitments 
to Great Britain, and the attitude of public opinion. 
Lend-lease facilities have not yet been extended to 
the Soviet Union, which is believed to have sufficient 
funds readily available for present orders. 


The Soviet-American trade agreement, first signed 
in 1935, was renewed on August 2 for another year, 
but without the usual provision obligating the 
U.S.S.R. to buy at least $40,000,000 worth of Ameri- 
can goods in return for most-favored-nation treat- 
ment. United States exports to the Soviet Union have 
fluctuated greatly during the past decade: 1930, 
$114.4 million; 1933, $9.0 million; 1937, $42.9 mil- 
lion; 1938, $69.7 million; 1939, $58.6 million; 1940, 
$86.9 million; and 1941 (first quarter), $16.4 mil- 
lion. In recent years American exports have consisted 
almost entirely of manufactures and semi-manufac- 


tures, including machinery, machine tools, vehicles, 
aircraft, gasoline and refined copper. 


TRANSPORTATION DIFFICULTIES. The abil. we 
ity of the United States to send supplies to the Soviet 
Union is seriously limited by the lack of available 
ports. The ice-free port of Murmansk and its railway | 
to Leningrad are menaced by the German drive in the | 
north, while Archangel, farther east, is frozen during | ToL. X: 
winter months. A second route is offered by the |— 
Trans-Iranian railway, which connects the Caspian ROC 
Sea with the Persian Gulf, but its carrying capacity is 
probably limited. The most convenient port is Vladi- | THE 
vostok, from which supplies could be sent to Soviet | * Mi 
forces in the Maritime Provinces or shipped across | Augus' 
the Trans-Siberian railway. Vladivostok can be | import 
reached, however, only by means of the narrow chan. | apecte 
nels through the Japanese archipelago and the Sea | govern 
of Japan. Shipping shortages create another difficult | plishm 
problem, because a considerable portion of the o- vealed, 
viet: Union’s merchant marine—which consisted of the Pre 
246 ocean-going vessels of over 2,000 tons, totalling cuss sj 


938,357 tons, on January 1, 1941—is probably locked | Nazi ¥ 
in the Baltic and Black Seas. ioint R 
August 


POLITICAL OBSTACLES. The delicacy of the} of the 
new relationship between the Soviet Union and the) ppa 
United States is reflected in the extreme caution with | soou: 
which the Administration has moved in recent weeks. | j, eigt 
Aid to Russia is even more unpopular in some quat- | ment ¢ 
ters than aid to Britain, as evidenced by the state ing the 
ment issued on August 5 by fifteen Republican lead: aime 
ers, including Herbert Hoover, Alfred M. Landon, | "eh 
Charles G. Dawes, Frank O. Lowden, Ray Lyman} pounce 
Wilbur, Henry P. Fletcher, Robert M. Hutchins and} yig, y 
John L. Lewis. This declaration, endorsing aid t0} termed 
Britain and China but denouncing the Anglo-Russiat} sein 
alliance, has had its counterpart in many speeches if} jaye }, 
Congress, where isolationist sentiment appears to 0} ind 
reviving. struge 

Proponents of aid to Russia point out, however, not} cess, 
only the strategic advantages of a two-front campaigi} Mater! 
against Germany, but the importance of northeastem|; tation 
Siberia to defense of the Western Hemisphere. The standa 
Monroe Doctrine originated in part as a warning tt) Some 
Russia, which appeared in 1823 to be menacing tht shadoy 
United States by its expansion southward from} the es 
Alaska. The defeat of the U.S.S.R. would bring Japa ford a 
or Germany to the Bering Straits, or within only 56 safety 
miles of North America. objecti 

JAMES FREDERICK GREEN cham 


