tally 2 
1sive at 


tion in 
report 
d in a 
avid |. 
nber 7 
st.” In 
the in- 


> might | 


ic area. 
convoy 
| aerial 
rent of 


issued | 
Repub | 


ore x 
ar feud 


Lmerica | 


=se and 
4 some: 
ns that 
general 


YDOX 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 


pé&ntered as 2nd class matter 


gre 12 ‘0M 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


VoL. XXI, No. 16 


FEBRUARY 6, 1942 


UNITED WAR EFFORT CALLS FOR DEMOCRATIC ACTION 


AS the war spreads across all continents and 

oceans in ever widening circles, it seems at 
times to lose definite shape and tangible lines of 
demarcation. While the British withdraw from 
Malaya into the stronghold of Singapore, American 
and Dutch forces attack Japanese ships in the Strait 
of Macassar and Japanese islands in the Pacific. 
German advances in Libya are counterbalanced by 
continuing Russian gains on the eastern front. Un- 
like the trench warfare of 1914-1918, the present 
conflict sways back and forth, with few points of 
stability at which it can be fixed. 

Yet in spite of this apparent fluidity, certain main 
trends become discernible. In his speech of Janu- 
ary 30 Hitler admitted Germany’s setbacks in Russia, 
although he attributed them to the effects of the 
Russian winter rather than to the military might of 
the Red Army. Hitler no longer held out the hope 
to his people of a victory in 1942, and told them the 
United States had now become Germany’s principal 
enemy, linking President Roosevelt, across the years, 
with President Wilson. 

NO ROOM FOR COMPLACENCY. But diffi- 
cult as Germany's position has been made by the 
unexpected hardships of the Russian campaign and 
the entrance of the United States into the war, it 
would be dangerously complacent to minimize the 
striking power the Axis holds in reserve. Plans for 
joint utilization of this striking power were em- 
bodied in a military convention signed in Berlin on 
January 18 by Germany, Japan and Italy. Mr. 
Churchill, in his speech of January 27 to the House 
of Commons, on which he received a 464 to 1 vote 
of confidence two days later, did not hesitate to ad- 
mit the narrowness of the margin that has hitherto 
separated Britain and its allies from defeat. Far 
from taking a complacent view of setbacks in Libya 
and Malaya, the Prime Minister—who for years 
had been demanding rearmament—frankly declared 


that the British Empire had not at any time been 
prepared to fight the Axis powers simultaneously on 
all fronts. He stressed once more the problem that 
looms paramount in the strategy of the United Na- 
tions—the problem of where available resources of 
men and matériel can be most effectively used. 

Much of the criticism directed against both Mr. 
Churchill and Mr. Roosevelt must be read not in 
the context of events since Dunkirk or Pearl Harbor, 
which revolutionized the thinking of millions in 
Britain and the United States, but in the context of 
the preceding quarter of a century. During that quar- 
ter of a century a majority of the British and Ameri- 
can peoples, as well as millions of others through- 
out the world, opposed war and preparations for 
war. They wanted peace, and were reluctant to de- 
vote the economic and financial resources of their 
countries to armaments, insisting that these resources 
should be spent, instead, on improvement of 
standards of living and expansion of the amenities 
of life. This would have been a legitimate and, in- 
deed, a praiseworthy objective—provided the rest 
of the world had been satisfied with the then exist- 
ing situation. That did not turn out to be the case. 
If undreamed of sacrifices must now be made by 
Britain, the United States, and the other United 
Nations, it is because at an earlier date these na- 
tions failed to make the lesser sacrifices which, at 
best, might have served to maintain peace or, at 
worst, have permitted the anti-Axis powers to take 
the offensive. 

ENDS AND MEANS. Today, as these sacrifices 
are faced, it is essential constantly to keep in mind 
not only the means by which this war is being won, 
but also the ends for which it is being fought. It is 
realized by China, Australia, the Dutch East In- 
dies, as well as by the conquered peoples of Europe, 
that from now on until the Axis has been defeated 
the bulk of the financial and military contributions 


to the joint cause will have to come from the British 
Empire, the United States and Russia, which com- 
mand the industrial resources needed for modern 
warfare. If a choice is to be made between the lead- 
ership of the Nazis in their “new order” and the 
leadership of Germany's principal opponents, the 
anti-Axis peoples would unhesitatingly choose the 
latter. But this does not mean for a moment that 
Britain and the United States can neglect the wishes 
Or aspirations of the peoples of Europe and Asia 
who, until now, have borne the brunt of the second 
world war. Australia has already indicated its con- 
cern regarding the exclusion of the Dominions from 
a vote in the British War Cabinet, at a time when 
Australian troops are playing an important part in 
the defense of Libya and Malaya. China has found 
cause for anxiety in the apparent concentration of 
Anglo-American attention on the task of defeating 
Hitler first. Similarly, Norway and Holland, whose 
ships—and, in the case of Holland, colonial empire 
—are such important assets in the global war, would 
feel concerned if they are to be long excluded from 
the Anglo-American committees for the pooling of 
shipping, raw materials and munitions whose es- 
tablishment was announced in Washington on Jan- 
uaty 27. In a struggle dedicated not only to the 
defense, but also to the expansion of the democratic 
way of life, it is essential that all the nations con- 
tributing to this struggle should receive democratic 
treatment—with due regard totheneed forspeedy mili- 
tary action. Otherwise, Nazi propaganda to the ef- 
fect that Britain and the United States offer the 
world only another version of imperialism would 


= Page Two 


receive gratuitous encouragement 

In the same way, Britain and the United State; 
must be constantly on guard against becoming asso. 
ciated, during the war, with any reactionary leadex 
who might want to resume their rule over countries 
now dominated by Hitler—such as King Carol of 
Rumania. A favorite theme of Nazi propaganda js 
that Britain and the United States represent the 
forces of reaction, as opposed to the forces of the 
new revolution allegedly represented by Hitler and 
his puppet régimes. Such propaganda has had little 
effect among Europeans who can see for themselves 
what Nazi rule means in practice; and few are 
deceived by the efforts of the Nazis to bolster up| 
Quisling in Norway or the Nazi-dominated régime’ 
in Czechoslovakia by giving them the semblance of 
permanence. But it remains none the less essential 
for Britain and the United States to be constantly in| 
touch not only with the governments in exile, which 
may not always reflect the changing temper of their 
own peoples, but also directly with those peoples 
themselves, who will be called on to reconstruct) 
Europe when war is over. The appointment, on Jan. 
uary 12, of General Draga Mihailovich (who leads} 
his country’s guerrilla warriors against Germany) 
to the post of Yugoslav Minister of War, indicates 
the way in which it might be possible to forge liv. 
ing links between the United Nations which, on the! 
periphery of Europe and Asia, are striving for mili- 
tary defeat of the Axis, and the conquered peoples| 
who, in various ways and at great personal risk, are! 
also making a valuable contribution to the anti-Axis| 
cause. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


EIRE’S NEUTRALITY SUBJECTED TO INCREASING STRAIN 


The arrival of American troops in Northern Ire- 
land on January 26 has again brought the Irish prob- 
lem into the foreground. Although Northern Ire- 
land is in fact a part of the United Kingdom, Eamon 
de Valera, Premier of Eire, protested that he had 
not been consulted about the expedition. He charged 
that the United States, by sending troops to North- 
ern Ireland, had recognized a ‘“Quisling govern- 
ment” and had taken a “lease” on Irish soil which 
seriously threatened the neutrality of Eire. 


PARTITION. The partition of Ireland dates from 
1920-22, when two governments were established in 


U.S. SHIPPING AND THE WAR 
January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . . . 25c per copy 


An examination of the maritime position of the United 
States—its condition at the beginning of the war; what 
has been done thus far; and what may yet be achieved. 


[ForeIGN Po.icy Reports are published on the 1st and 15th 
of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to FPA members $3.] 


the island. The Irish Free State was separated from! 
Great Britain and given the status of a dominion, 

while Northern Ireland (comprising six counties of | 
Ulster) was left in the United Kingdom. Norther 

Ireland, although subject to the British Government, 

possesses a government and parliament which exer: ) 
cise jurisdiction over matters of local concern. Two | 
thirds of the people of Northern Ireland are Protes 

tants who favor union with England. The Catholic 

minority, however, demands union with Eire. 


The stationing of American troops in Norther | 
Ireland gave Premier de Valera an opportunity to 
voice once again his government's deep-seated oppo 
sition to partition. In the constitution of 1937, which 
he introduced, the national territory of Eire (Ire 
land in English) was defined to include the whole’ 
of the island. According to de Valera, the mainte | 
nance of British and American troops in the north, 
has made it impossible for Eire to exercise juris 
diction over territory it regards as part of its own 

NEUTRALITY IMPAIRED? Premier Eamon de 


— 


Valera h 
in this ¢ 
the leas 
Cobh an 
America 
Fire in 
territory 
and the 
friendly 
bases in 
proteste 
without 
The t 
Atlantic 
planes 
menace. 
needed 
Valera 
Northe 
upon h 
CON 
the Go 
in Nor 
duced i 
tested 
of the 
a coun 
insistec 
six COL 
the Re 
the m« 
The C 
North 
reoper 
there 
that c 
sistanc 


The 
the L 
Febru 
forces 
impli 
partie 
debat 
that | 
but h 
quest 
tions 
eral | 
Righ 
been 
supp 
conse 
trem 
socia 


———s 


| States 
12 asso. 
leaders 
UNtries 
arol of 
anda js 
“nt the 
of the 
ler and 
id. little 
mselves 
ew are 
ster up 


régime 
ance of! 
ssential 
intly in| 
, which! 
»f their! 
peoples| 
nstruct } 
on Jan-| 
oO leads 
‘many) | 
\dicates| 
ge liv-| 
on the) 
or mili-| 
peoples 
isk, are 
1ti- Axis 
MEAN | 


d fron | 
ninion, 
ities of | 
orthern 
‘nment, 
h exer: ) 
. Two | 
Protes- 
‘atholic 


orthern 
nity to 
1 oppo: | 
which | 
e (Ire 
whole 
mainte 
> north 
> juris 
‘S$ OWN. 
non de 


— 


— 
—V7—_—_— 


Valera has emphasized that Eire will remain neutral 
in this conflict at all cost. In particular he opposes 
the leasing of Irish ports to Britain. Berehaven, 
Cobh and Lough Swilly, used by the British and the 
Americans during the last war, were turned over to 
fire in 1938. In return Eire promised not to let its 
territory be used as a base of attack against Britain, 
and the Chamberlain government believed that a 
friendly Ireland would prove more valuable than 
bases in a hostile country. Only Winston Churchill 
protested at that time against the cession of the ports 
without some arrangement for common defense. 
The use of the Irish ports would shorten the North 
Atlantic supply lines by at least 200 miles, and 
planes based in Ireland could reduce the submarine 
menace. Now that ships and planes are greatly 
needed by the United Nations in the global war, de 
Valera fears that American soldiers were sent to 
Northern Ireland in a move to increase the pressure 
upon his government to cede the ports. 
CONSCRIPTION. This is not the first time that 
the Government of Eire has protested against events 
in Northern Ireland. When conscription was intro- 
duced in England in 1939, the Irish government pro- 
tested bluntly that the large Nationalist minority 
of the six counties should not be forced to fight for 
a country to which they did not belong. De Valera 
insisted that the conscription of Irishmen in the 
six counties would be “‘an act of aggression,” and 
the Roman Catholic Bishops of Ulster denounced 
the measure as a violation of Nationalists’ rights. 
The Chamberlain government therefore exempted 
Northern Ireland from the draft. Winston Churchill 
reopened the issue, however, two years later. Again 
there were protests, and the Nationalists warned 
that conscription was unjust and would cause re- 
sistance. The British Prime Minister reconsidered, 


Page Three 


and announced on May 27 that conscription in 
Northern Ireland would cause more trouble than it 
was worth. According to estimates, only 100,000 
men would have been drafted. 

SUPPLIES. Eire has meanwhile discovered that 
the role of a neutral is not an easy one. Because of 
its lack of shipping, the problem of supplies is seri- 
ous. Nine ships of Irish registry were sunk during 
the first year and a half of the war, and it became 
impossible to replace them. Ireland is therefore de- 
pendent on the limited space available in British 
and American merchant ships for its imports. Sup- 
plies of wheat, oil, coal, tea and coffee have been 
drastically curtailed. The shortage of raw materials 
has caused many factories to close down, thereby in- 
creasing the already serious unemployment. 

DEFENSE. When Britain withdrew all of its 
military forces from Eire by ceding the south and 
west ports in 1938, the government at Dublin as 
sumed full responsibility for the defense of the 
country. The transition was difficult, however, for the 
Irish showed little concern over the march of events 
on the continent of Europe and voted defense ap- 
propriations grudgingly. At present Ireland has an 
army of about 250,000 men, perhaps 50,000 of 
whom are equipped. Its navy numbers nine armed 
trawlers and nine small boats of other types; its 
air force, a few planes, but not of the latest design. 
Although A.R.P. services have been organized, Eire 
does not as yet have the anti-aircraft defenses neces- 
sary to withstand bombing raids. Strong American 
and some British garrisons‘on the frontier of North- 
ern Ireland stand ready to assist Eire in the event of 
a German invasion. It is doubtful, however, whether 
Eire will voluntarily respond to Allied pressure and 
abandon its rigid neutrality. 

MarGARET La Foy 


CHILEAN ELECTION FAVORS ALLIED CAUSE 


The triumph of Juan Antonio Rios, candidate of 
the Left center parties in the Chilean election of 
February 1, represents a victory for the anti-Axis 
forces in South America. The victory, however, is 
implicit in the success of the strongest pro-Allied 
parties in Chile, not in any clear-cut electoral issue 
debated by the two candidates. Both had asserted 
that they would cooperate with the United States, 
but had refrained from commitments on the crucial 
question whether or not to sever diplomatic rela- 
tions with the Axis powers. Nevertheless, if Gen- 
eral Carlos Ibafiez del Campo, the candidate of the 
Right, had been elected, he would undoubtedly ha: 
been swayed to some extent by the counsel of his 
Supporters. These included not only the landed, 
conservative elements of the country—who are ex- 
tremely anti-communist and even suspicious of the 
social doctrines of the New Deal—but also the Pop- 


ular Socialist Vanguard, Chile’s fascist party. 
LEFT-WING PROGRAM SUSTAINED. The 
real significance of the election rests in the clear de- 
cision of the voters to uphold the social doctrines 
of the Left. For decades the living standards of the 
Chilean masses have been extremely low, largely 
because, according to liberals, wealthy landowners 
and foreign corporations have skimmed the cream 
of the Chilean economy. In 1938 the Radical, So- 
cialist and Communist parties, together with smaller 
Left-wing factions, united in a precariously knit 
Popular Front and presented Don Pedro Aguirre 
Cerda as their candidate for President. The cam- 
paign was bitter; but Aguirre Cerda managed to 
win by 2,111 votes out of a total of over 443,000 
cast. In large part his victory was due to an abor- 
tive revolt by the Popular Socialist Vanguard, in 
which Ibafiez, who had headed a Rightist dictator- 


ship from 1927 to 1931, was indirectly implicated. 

The legislative record of the intervening years 
has been rather mediocre. The bulk of the social 
security measures for which Chile is famous owe 
their inception not to the Popular Front but to the 
efforts of former President Arturo Alessandri Palma 
in 1925. The Aguirre Cerda régime has made little 
if any progress in dealing with the problem of land 
ownership and the conditions of the rural worker— 
probably because many large landowners belong to 
the Radical party, the biggest and most conservative 
of the coalition groups. On the other hand, the 
personnel of mines and industry has been assisted 
by a drive, under government patronage, to organ- 
ize labor in trade unions, and by laws requiring 
sharp increases in wages and social security benefits. 

But the government has been unable to control 
the financial consequences of its own actions. While 
the index of daily wages paid out rose from 200 
in 1938 to 377 in September 1941, the production 
of minerals, textiles and manufactures has shown 
only relatively slight increases, and the number of 
acres sown to cereals has declined appreciably. The 
result has been sharp inflationary pressure on all 
prices. The cost of living in Santiago rose 39 per 
cent between August 1939 and September 1941, 
with food prices advancing 51 per cent in the same 
period. Although people living on fixed incomes 
have been hit severely, it is generally admitted that 
labor is on the whole still better off than it was in 
1938. The inflationary cycle is continuing, however, 
with ominous implications for the future. 

Despite a constant drumfire of criticism from the 
Right, the country elected a Congress on March 2, 
1941 with a small working majority of Popular 
Front members—assuming that the coalition re- 
mained solid. In fact, however, it was rent by a 
struggle between Socialists and Communists over 
international policy, and by the reluctance of many 
Radicals to sanction the more extreme proposals and 
purposes of both the other parties. Instead of slow- 
ly disintegrating, the Left-wing alliance was gal- 
vanized anew by the death of President Aguirre 
Cerda on November 25, 1941. In the ensuing cam- 
paign, the Right centered its fire on the allegedly 
communist tendencies of the Popular Front, its 
challenge to authority and discipline, and its admin- 
istrative inefficiency. Admitting the inadequate na- 
ture of their accomplishments, the Left-wing groups 
asserted that the reconstruction effort after the great 
earthquake of January 1939 and the effect of the 


Page Four 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 


Subject: NAVY STEPPINGSTONES TO ASIA 
Speaker: William P. Maddox 

Date: Sunday, February 8 

Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 


war on Chile’s economy had prevented single 
minded concentration on the country’s pressing 9 
cial problems. They pointed out that the country di 
not possess the financial resources to carry out ; 
thoroughgoing Popular Front program until its ecop 
omy had been fundamentally altered. 

A PAUSE FOR CONSOLIDATION. After con 
siderable jockeying for position, all the more pro 
gressive political elements united behind Dr. Juap 
Antonio Rios in a Democratic Anti-Fascist Front 
This union, tacitly supported by the Communist 
(whose backing Rios had refused), warned th 
voters that Ibafiez would restore the dictatorship be 
had formerly exercised, this time with a definit 
fascist orientation. Dr. Rios himself is one of the 
most conservative of Radicals and is reputed to bh 
personally friendly with Ibafiez. His speeches o 
domestic policy have not differed markedly from 
those of the General. Yet his election by a majority 
of over 55,000 indicates that Chileans are being in 
creasingly impressed by the need for social reform 

In the immediate future a period of pause, con 
solidation and readjustment is to be expected under 
the leadership of Dr. Rios. The campaign and it 
outcome are in many ways reminiscent of the Mexi 
can election of August 1940. At that time President 
Cardenas, the Left-wing reformer, stepped aside ané 
permitted his party to elect the far more conserva 
tive Manuel Avila Camacho, whose adversary had 
relied heavily on reactionary and fascist backers. In 
both Chile and Mexico, Latin American voters are 
repeating the normal pendulum movements of de 


mocracy—from progress to consolidation and again | 


onward—by ballots rather than by force, and with 
a decided repudiation of leaders whose democratic 


faith appears doubtful. Davin H. Popper 


The Reconstruction of Europe, by Guglielmo Ferrero. New 
York, Putnam, 1941. $3.50 


} 
The story of the Congress of Vienna of 1815, told by an 


Italian historian who believes that the problems of re 
building Europe after Napoleon offer some striking par- 


allels to the problems of our times. One-sided in its ex! 


altation of Talleyrand and Louis XVIII, but contains 
many interesting comparisons between these two periods. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 16, Fesruary 6, 1942. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Secretary; Vera Micueres Dean, Editor; Daviw H. Poppsr, Associate Editor. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


B81 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Frank Ross McCoy, President; Witttiam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Last, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


ti 
carious 
served 
numer: 
and re 
inate | 
Unitec 
might} 
and re 
power 
Cavite 
Ambo 
izatior 
sequet 
only 1 
and sc 
suffere 
Austr: 


archi 
nauti 
Melb 
coast 


