


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 5 NOVEMBER 25, 1938 





It is not to early to plan to 


GIVE AN F.P.A. MEMBERSHIP FOR CHRISTMAS 
Regular Membership $5 Associate Membership $3 
Your friends will appreciate your thoughtfulness in making 


it possible for them to keep in close touch with the swift- 
moving events in the international field throughout 1939. 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 























ANGLO-AMERICAN AGREEMENT CAPS HULL PROGR 





5 as completion of reciprocal trade agreements 

with Great Britain and Canada brings to a climax 
the lifetime efforts of Secretary of State Cordell Hull 
to achieve tariff reduction. In a formal ceremony 
attended by President Roosevelt at the White House 
on November 17, the treaties were signed by Secre- 
tary Hull, Prime Minister W. L. Mackenzie King of 
Canada, and Sir Ronald Lindsay, the British Am- 
bassador. Both treaties—the nineteenth and twen- 
tieth to be negotiated under the Trade Agreements 
Act of 1934—will become effective on January 1, 
1939 for three years, and may continue indefinitely 
thereafter until six months’ notice of termination has 
been given by either party. The Canadian treaty is 
the first of the Hull trade agreements to be renewed, 
replacing and expanding the one which went into 
effect on January 1, 1936. 

The Anglo-American agreement is the most im- 
portant achievement of the entire Hull program, for 
it aids the commerce of the two largest trading coun- 
tries in the world and joins the American system to 
the network of Ottawa treaties. This agreement, in- 
volving specific concessions—reductions or bindings 
—on trade which totaled $675,000,000 in 1936, com- 
prises not only the United Kingdom but also New- 
foundland and the non-self-governing colonies, and 
lays the foundation for later agreements with the 
British Dominions. Britain’s major concessions affect 
American agricultural products, especially with the 
removal of duties on wheat, lard, canned grapefruit, 
and certain fruit juices, and reduction of duties on 
tice, apples, pears, and certain canned fruits. One of 
the results of the removal of the British duty on 
American wheat is that Canadian wheat, which for- 
merly entered England duty-free only when shipped 
from Canada, may once more be shipped through 
New York and Boston, reviving the trade of these 
ports. The quota for American ham is expanded, and 


the duty-free entry of ham and other pork products, 
corn, and cotton is bound for the future. Additional 
concessions are granted on American fishery, lumber, 
and factory products. 

In return for concessions in the British market, the 
United States grants reductions or bindings on im- 
ports from the United Kingdom totaling $141,500,- 
000 in 1937. The concessions involve principally 
British textiles, metals, and various specialties, and 
are generally limited to types of products which are 
complementary to American manufactures. Impor- 
tant tariff reductions are made in the duties on high- 
grade cotton, wool, flax and hemp manufactures, as 
well as certain earths, pottery, glassware, and leather 
products; the present duty on whiskey is bound; and 
the duty on British books is reduced 50 per cent, the 
maximum permitted under the Act. 

The new Canadian agreement greatly enlarges the 
benefits enjoyed by both countries under the 1936 
treaty. Canada removes a special 3 per cent import 
tax on articles otherwise free or dutiable, which com- 
prise 57 per cent of the total imports from the United 
States, and grants new concessions on many Ameri- 
can manufactures, including automobiles. The United 
States, in turn, reduces or binds its duties on many 
Canadian agricultural, livestock and fishery products. 
As the result of both the Canadian and British 
treaties, many of the imperial preferences are re- 
moved and the United States can compete more suc- 
cessfully in both markets. 

It is as yet impossible to estimate the economic 
effects of the two agreements, for internal develop- 
ments—especially in the United States—and diplo- 
matic changes play a decisive réle in international 
trade. The success of both agreements depends to a 
large extent on continued recovery in the United 
States, since the recent business recession has seri- 
ously curtailed our imports and reduced the purchas- 





) 
j 
| 


ii Se ET 














ing power of foreign countries. During the first eight 
months of 1938, American imports from Britain de- 
clined 52 per cent as compared with the correspond- 
ing iiaiod of 1937, while imports from Canada de- 
clined 42 per cent. American exports to Canada, on 
the other hand, declined only 3.9 per cent during 
1938, while exports to Britain increased 16 per cent. 
Although reduction in American tariff duties will 
prove an important incentive to greater imports from 
Britain and Canada, general improvement in our 
national economy is the basic requirement for a re- 
vival of international trade. 

These new trade agreements, which reverse the 
trend toward self-sufficiency accelerated by the 
Smoot-Hawley tariff in 1930 and the Ottawa treaties 
of 1932, are particularly significant from the political 
point of view. By underscoring the diplomatic 
solidarity of the democratic countries and reaffirm- 
ing their cooperation in the Western Hemisphere, 
the agreements constitute an important defense 
against the economic nationalism of the dictatorships 
and an effective answer to events in Munich since 
Munich. The signature of the trade agreements, and 
the announcement that the British sovereigns will 
visit Canada and the United States next spring have 
probably proved unwelcome to Berlin, Rome and 
Tokyo. If the new agreements fail to revive pros- 
perity through freer commerce, however, both Britain 
and America may be pushed further toward the con- 
trolled economies which they now seek to escape. 
It is too early to judge whether these treaties are the 
last stand of economic liberalism against totalitarian- 
ism, Of a major advance toward saner commercial 


conditions. JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


JAPAN ASSERTS HEGEMONY IN ASIA 

In recent weeks the fundamental issue between 
Japan and the Western democratic powers has been 
posed more clearly than at any previous time during 
the current Far Eastern hostilities. While the Ameri- 
can government was awaiting the Japanese reply to 
its note of October 6, an auxiliary question—the 
barring of foreign vessels from the Yangtze River— 
was raised by French, British and American repre- 
sentations at Tokyo on November 7. In answer to 
these protests, the Japanese government maintained 
that, owing to continuance of military operations and 
guerrilla attacks, ‘the time has not yet arrived to 
warrant a general opening” of the river to foreign 
shipping. This plea of insecurity on the Yangtze is 
not wholly supported by activities of Japanese na- 
tionals, who are transporting commercial cargoes up 
and down the river on Japanese ships. Both at Han- 
kow and Canton, moreover, numbers of newly ar- 
rived Japanese entrepreneurs are already capitalizing 
on existing possibilities for business and commercial 
enterprise. 


Page Two 








The same basic issue of discrimination against 
American trading equality, in contravention of rights 
set forth in the Nine-Power Treaty, was raised in 
more detailed and comprehensive form by the United 
States note of October 6.* The Japanese reply of 
November 18 is mainly devoted to a technical re- 
buttal of the charge that the new currency and for- 
eign exchange control measures instituted in North 
China favor Japanese as against American traders. 
Japan’s revision of the Chinese tariff and the estab- 
lishment of Japanese-controlled development com- 
panies are also defended as ‘‘necessary’” and non- 
discriminatory. The restrictions on residence, travel 
and trade of American citizens in occupied areas are 
justified on the ground of “military necessities and 
local conditions of peace and order.” The reply does 
not admit that Americans in Japan are treated differ- 
ently from Japanese in the United States, and reserves 
Japan’s views on the latter issue for a future state- 
ment. The concluding sentences are the most sig- 
nificant. Japan, it is stated, “is devoting her energy 
to establishment of a new order based on genuine 
international justice throughout East Asia. . . . It is 
the firm conviction of the Japanese government that 
in face of the new situation, fast developing in East 
Asia, any attempt to apply to the conditions of today 
and tomorrow inapplicable ideas and principles of 
the past would neither contribute toward establish- 
ment of a real peace in East Asia nor solve immedi- 
ate issues. However, as long as these points are un- 
derstood, Japan has not the slightest inclination to 
oppose participation of the United States and other 
powers in the great work of reconstructing East Asia 
along lines of industry and trade; and I believe the 
new régimes now being formed in China are prepared 
to welcome such foreign participation.” 


The implication of these sentences is unmistakable. 
Japan declares, in effect, that the principles of the 
Nine-Power Treaty concerning the open door and 
China's territorial and administrative integrity are 
no longer applicable to the “new situation’ in the 
Far East. Not in so many words, but none the less 
clearly, Japan announces the unilateral abrogation 
of the Nine-Power Treaty. This does not mean, how- 
ever, that American business interests are henceforth 
to be excluded from China. On the contrary, they are 
heartily welcome—provided, of course, that they 
participate in the new era of “reconstruction” on 
Japanese terms and subject to Japanese control. The 
note invites a partnership of Japanese brains and 
American capital. 


The Washington administration, like American 
business men, also faces a choice—but of somewhat 


different character. The Japanese note represents the 


(Continued on Page 4) 


***Has Japan Won the War?’’ 


Foreign Policy Bulletin, November 4, 1938. 








off 


juc 


th 
fo 
wl 
co 
du 
ISS 
"e 
th 





le. 
the 
ind 
are 
the 
less 
ion 
oW- 
yrth 
are 
hey 

on 
The 
and 


ican 
yhat 


the 





Washington News Letter 


— 





sibben, 











WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 21—At least six major developments have 
crowded into the past seven days to give the State 
Department its busiest week since Munich. These 
developments include: the summoning home of 
Hugh R. Wilson, American Ambassador to Berlin 
(Nov. 14); the announcement of the departure of 
Dr. Hans Dieckhoff, German Ambassador to Wash- 
ington (Nov. 18); the signing of the British and 
Canadian trade agreements (Nov. 17); settlement 
of the long-standing Mexican agrarian controversy 
(Nov. 12); appointment of the United States dele- 
gation to the Lima conference (Nov. 13); 
Japan’s reply (Nov. 18) to Secretary Hull’s strong 
note of October 6 protesting violation of the Open 
Door in China. 


“Profound Reaction.” Naturally, Washington 
officials are unprepared at this stage to express final 
judgments on this swift sequence of events. There is 
general agreement, however, that two or three of 
these developments may influence — perhaps pro- 
foundly — certain trends in American foreign policy 
which have gained momentum since the Munich ac- 
cord. This is particularly evident in the reaction pro- 
duced by events in Germany. When Secretary Hull 
issued his instruction to Mr. Wilson to return for 
“consultation and report,” he was careful to employ 
the conventional methods of diplomacy. He offered 
no word of explanation to guide correspondents in 
covering the story—except that this step did not con- 
stitute a recall or a breach of diplomatic relations— 
and his aides were instructed to give no hint of fu- 
ture action. But President Roosevelt, less trammeled 
by diplomatic convention, spoke openly and with de- 
liberate emphasis at his press conference the next 
morning, when he registered the “profound reaction” 
of the American people to Germany’s campaign 
against the Jews. 

This profound reaction is visible in official quarters 
throughout Washington. At the State Department 
there is little talk about reprisals, boycotts, or em- 
bargoes, for the present at any rate, but there is a 
distinctly different atmosphere. What has happened 
in Germany has produced a deep impression on vit- 
tually every responsible official. It has clearly altered 
the outlook of those who had hoped to find a prac- 
ticable basis for limited collaboration between the 
democracies and the dictatorships. It has stiffened 
those who have consistently opposed the Chamber- 


lain policy of appeasement—although momentarily, 
at least, it has narrowed the widening gap between 
London and Washington. It has greatly intensified 
the drive for rearmament. It has increased the pres- 
sure for inter-American solidarity, but not for re- 
gional isolation. There is a visible tendency, not yet 
formulated and still vague, which suggests that some 
day the unity of the Western Hemisphere, from 
Canada to Argentina, may be directed outward as an 


instrument of policy affecting the world balance of 
power. 


Refugees. Immediate. action will apparently be 
limited to measures looking toward some concerted 
attack on the refugee problem. But last week the 
White House and the State Department remained 
completely in the dark about the projected “plans” 
broadcast from London. Strange as it may seem, 
Washington officials had no direct knowledge of 
the various proposals said to have been discussed by 
Ambassador Kennedy with representatives of the 
British government, and for several days the Depart- 
ment was actually at a loss to know what was hap- 
pening in London. Some of this confusion still per- 
sists, and the practical possibilities of large-scale emi- 
gration are far from clear. The State Department, 
however, by sending Mr. Myron Taylor back to Eu- 
rope as United States representative on the Inter- 
Governmental Committee, hopes to expand the Evian 
program to meet the most urgent requirements of 
the new situation. 


Lima Delegation. The composition of the United 
States delegation to the Lima conference—with its 
“surprise” appointments of Mr. Landon and Miss 
Katherine Lewis, daughter of the President of the 
ClO—was widely heralded as another expression of 
the high importance attached to the promotion of 
pan-American unity. But to those who knew the 
President's mind, the representative character of the 
delegation indicated something more: the equally 
high importance attached to domestic unity, not only 
on Latin American relations, but also on all issues 
of American foreign policy. Other members of the 
delegation, in addition to Secretary Hull, include 
Adolf A. Berle, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State; 
Mrs. Elise F. Musser, a member of the delegation to 
the 1936 conference; Professor Charles G. Fenwick 
of Bryn Mawr College; Dan W. Tracy, President of 
the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers; 
Emilio del Toro Cuevas, Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court of Puerto Rico; R. Henry Norweb, Minister 








ew a Po eee ee 


ce lacy rm 


HN 
5 
i 
4 
*! 
y 
‘ 


| 
' 
| 








— 











to the Dominican Republic; Lawrence A. Steinharde, 
Ambassador to Peru; Rev. John F. O'Hara, President 
of Notre Dame University; and Green H. Hack- 
worth, legal advisor of the State Department. An 
exceptionally large corps of technical advisers will 
accompany the delegation. 

Mexican Settlement. Apart from the British and 
Canadian reciprocal trade agreements, no develop- 
ment of the week brought greater satisfaction to the 
administration than the settlement of the agrarian 
controversy with Mexico, announced in an exchange 
of notes made public on November 12. The most 
dangerous obstacle to Latin American harmony at 
the Lima conference was thus removed. Under the 
terms of the accord, Mexico agrees to pay the United 
States $1,000,000 in May 1939, and at least as much 
each year until the obligation is discharged. Valua- 
tion of the land expropriated since 1927 is to be de- 
termined by a commission composed of a represen- 
tative appointed by each government. Should the two 
representatives fail to agree, a third commissioner 
is to be appointed from the permanent commission 
set up under the terms of the Gondra treaty. Whether 
this settlement will lead to a similar adjustment of 
the much larger oil controversy remains uncertain. 
But it clearly emphasizes that the primary objective 
of American diplomacy is the achievement of pan- 
American solidarity. W. T. STONE 





—— Page Four = 





JAPAN ASSERTS HEGEMONY IN ASIA 
(Continued from Page 2) 


culmination of a train of events which began on 
September 18, 1931. Throughout this period the 
American government has continued to express its 
disapproval of Japan’s actions and to deny recogni- 
tion of the results of such actions. This position has 
now become virtually untenable. Its contradictions 
are especially apparent today, when the sale of war 
materials to Japan by private American firms and 
individuals is helping to produce the very situation 
against which the American government is vainly 
protesting. The alternatives are fairly obvious. We 
can either discontinue our protests and abandon our 
traditional Far Eastern policy, or devise and en- 
force measures which would implement the stand 
taken in the note of October 6. T. A. BISsoN 


TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY LUNCHEON 


The Twentieth Anniversary of the F.P.A. will be 
celebrated at the Hotel Astor on Saturday, December 
10, at 12:45 p.m. The Honorable John C. Winant, 
Director of the International Labour Office, will speak 
on “Social Change,” Mr. James G. McDonald will 
present the outstanding developments of the F.P.A. 
during the past two decades, and Mr. Raymond Leslie 
Buell will discuss ““The Future of Democracy.’’ We 
hope that many of our members will be able to attend. 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


F.P.A. members are entitled to a 10 per cent discount, with a few exceptions, on books ordered through 
the F.P.A. Library. In accordance with the new postage rates on books which became effective Novem- 
ber 1st, an average two-pound book may now be delivered anywhere in the United States for 3 cents. 


Unto Caesar, by F. A. Voight. New York, Putnam’s, 1938. 
$3.00 
An effective but somewhat uneven condemnation of 
Marxism and National Socialism as “secular religions” 
which are almost identical in theory and practice. 


Burgos Justice, by Ruiz Vilaplana. New York, Knopf, 
1938. $2.00 
A court official formerly in Franco Spain provides a 
critical picture of life in Insurgent territory. 


The Development of China, by Kenneth Scott Latourette. 
New York, Houghton Mifflin Co., 1937. $3.00 


The fifth edition, revised and enlarged, of a deservedly 
popular summary of China’s historical development. 


Power: A New Social Analysis, by Bertrand Russell. New 

York, W. W. Norton, 1938. $3.00 

One of the most stimulating discussions in recent years 
of social organization. With logic, wit and erudition, the 
famous British mathematician-philosopher suggests that 
“the fundamental concept in social science is Power, in 
the same sense in which Energy is the fundamental con- 
cept in physics.” The student of both domestic and foreign 
affairs will profit from this brilliant analysis of “power 
politics.” 


The Coming Victory of Democracy, by Thomas Mann. 
New York, Knopf, 1938. $1.00 
A stirring defense of liberal, progressive democracy 
which unfortunately fails to tell us how democratic gov- 
ernments may successfully combat the internal obstacles 
to social reform—the obstacles which appear to lead to 
dissension, weakness and revolution. 


America South, by Carleton Beals. Philadelphia, J. B. Lip- 
pincott, 1937. $3.50 


An attempt to portray the historical panorama of Latin 
America and the forces shaping our southern neighbors. 
Chapters are devoted to the current trade struggle, the 
Monroe Doctrine and Pan Americanism. 


Secret Agent of Japan, by Amleto Vespa. Boston, Little, 

Brown, 1938. $3.00 

Revelations of an Italian who worked for nearly five 
years as an intelligence officer of the Japanese Army in 
Manchoukuo. Since he had taken Chinese citizenship prior 
to Japan’s occupation of Manchuria, the Japanese authori- 
ties were able to compel him to enter their service by 
threatening the safety of his family. Escape was not ef- 
fected until 1936. He presents an inside view of actual 
conditions in Manchoukuo. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 5, NovemBer 25, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesite BugE.i, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


eB '8! 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





- 


Im ii 


a — ee FX 3 hee 


a dt tems 


