‘a Se ‘ 


om be VS OH — Fl 


a 









FOREIGN POLICY 
BULLETIN 


4n interpretation of current international events by the members of the 


Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 








Entered as  second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under che act 
of March 3, 1879. 














tr. XV, No. 19 


Marcu 6, 1936 





For the background of the News Bulletin articles, 


read these Foreign Policy Reports: 


THE TREND TOWARD DICTATORSHIP IN JAPAN 


February 13, 1935 


THE QUEST FOR ETHIOPIAN PEACE 
February 26, 1936 


Periodical Division, 


© 


Library of Congress, 


Washington, D. C. 











FASCISM OR LIBERALISM 


IN JAPAN? 





] ESIGNATIONS offered by the ranking gen- 

erals of the Supreme War Council constitute 
an admission of indirect responsibility by the 
army command for the assassination of three 
leading Japanese statesmen in the military up- 
rising at Tokyo on February 26. The force of this 
act is somewhat blunted, however, by the fact that 
t includes the moderate generals as well as Araki 
and Mazaki, the extremists whose activities were 
primarily responsible for the attempted coup 
l'état. Coming on the heels of the general elec- 
tion of February 20, in which the popular vote 
registered a pronounced anti-Fascist trend, the 
assassinations represented a deliberate attack on 
the parliamentary régime and afford an ironic 
commentary on Japan’s claim to be the “stabiliz- 
ing force” in East Asia. 

The uprising was staged by about 900 officers 
and men of the 3rd Infantry Regiment of the First 
Division. Moving with extreme secrecy and speed 
in the early hours of February 26, the leaders of 
the coup successively attacked the residences of 

x leading statesmen. Viscount Saito, Lord 
Privy Seal, and General Watanabe, Inspector 
General of Military Education, were immediately 
killed; Finance Minister Takahashi succumbed to 
his wounds. Admiral Suzuki, Lord Chamberlain, 
was seriously injured, while Count Makino es- 
caped unhurt. Not until February 29 was it dis- 
closed that Premier Okada, who was at first 
thought to have been killed, had escaped; his 
brother-in-law, Colonel Matsuo, who resembled 
him, had been mistakenly killed in his stead. 
Three days passed before the rebels, who had oc- 
cupied strategic centers near the Imperial Palace 
rrounds, were finally disarmed. One or two ring- 
leaders in the coup and several shamed loyalist 
oficers committed suicide; some twenty other 
officers implicated in the uprising have been dis- 
missed from the army and placed in a military 
prison; the non-commissioned officers and men are 
segregated in their barracks. 





The election returns of February 20 were un- 
doubtedly the spark which set off the revolt. They 
marked the climax of nearly four years of quiet 
maneuvering behind the scenes by the moderate 
statesmen, who had gradually reasserted their 
authority over the army extremists, despite the 
support given to the latter by a minority—the 
most reactionary—of Japanese capitalists. These 
“moderates” or “liberals” have never disavowed 
the results achieved by the military conquests in 
China. They represent the dominant view of 
Japanese business and finance, which seeks to 
place a brake on territorial expansion that pro- 
ceeds at too fast a pace, jeopardizing the gains 
already achieved and putting an undue strain on 
Japan’s economic and financial strength. Follow- 
ing the assassination of Premier Inukai in May 
1932, these elements, through the last Elder 
Statesman Prince Saionji, succeeded in placing 
the moderate compromise candidate, Viscount 
Saito, in the Premiership. He was succeeded in 
July 1934 by Admiral Okada, who represented 
similar views. During the early years of this 
period General Araki, outstanding leader of the 
army extremists, held the post of War Minister. 
The army program in China was followed through 
to its conclusion. The new state of “Manchoukuo” 
was set up; Japan resigned from the League; 
steady penetration of north China was accom- 
plished; and the Washington naval agreements 
were denounced. Throughout these years, how- 
ever, the moderates imposed certain checks on the 
army program. Despite all efforts by the army 
extremists, the inner group of Imperial advisers 
continued to be dominated by the moderates. Of 
these, Prince Saionji was the most influential; 
in the Imperial Household Ministry, also, Count 
Makino, as Lord Privy Seal, and his successor 
Viscount Saito, as well as Lord Chamberlain 
Suzuki, were all moderates. The same struggle 
went on in the Cabinet, with similar results. Each 
year, although the budgets for the armed forces 























vastly increased, Finance Minister Takahashi 
sought to pare down the huge estimates of the 
military and naval departments. Foreign Minis- 
ter Hirota finally succeeded in arranging an 
agreement for the purchase of the Chinese East- 
ern Railway from the Soviet Union, though at one 
time the military were apparently bent on taking 
it over by force. General Araki was succeeded 
in the War Ministry by General Hayashi, who in 
the summer of 1935 undertook to transfer ex- 
tremist army officers from key posts. One diffi- 
culty remained: the Seiyukai, the more national- 
ist and Fascist of the two major parties, still re- 
tained a majority in the lower house of the Diet, 
which had been elected in February 1922. In 
the recent election the government-supported 
Minseito party —timidly anti-Fascist — secured 
204 seats, while the Seiyukai was reduced to 174. 
Even more significant of the anti-Fascist trend 
was the election of 23 labor party candidates: 18 
Socialists, as against 5 in 1932, and 5 additional 
representatives of proletarian parties. The bal- 
lots of the Japanese people, which registered their 
distrust of the Fascist and expansionist aims of 
army extremists, were answered by the bullets of 
the assassins. 


At one stroke the insurrection wiped out much 
of the quasi-liberal gains slowly achieved over 
the past four years. In the first few days after 
the coup it appeared likely that an outright ex- 
tremist, such as General Araki, might be made 
Premier. The Emperor’s moderate advisers were 
scattered or in hiding, and the army extremists 
were making full use of their advantageous posi- 
tion. With the reappearance of Premier Okada, 
however, time has been gained for maturer con- 
sideration, and Prince Saionji and Count Makino 
have been called into consultation by the Em- 
peror. Even so, the demand for a “strong” 
Premier to quell the army unrest will probably 
dictate the appointment of a military man of more 
or less avowed Fascist views to head the next 
Cabinet. The final choice will have a profound 
effect on the immediate outlook for war or peace 
in the Far East. T. A. BISSON 


PEACE—OR AN OIL EMBARGO? 

When the League Committee of Eighteen re- 
assembled in Geneva on March 2, Mr. Eden, 
British Foreign Secretary, declared that his gov- 
ernment favored an oil embargo against Italy 
and was prepared to join in its early application 
if other supplying and transporting League states 
were ready to do likewise. This surprise move fol- 
lowed a plea by M. Flandin, French Foreign 
Minister, that the League Committee of Thirteen, 


Page Two 








which includes all Council members with the 
exception of Italy, should make one more attempt 
at conciliation within the framework of the 
League Covenant. It was apparently agreed that 
if Italy failed to accept the League’s peace terms 
by March 10, the oil embargo would be 
imposed without waiting for action by the United 
States. Meanwhile Italy, which claims smashing 
victories on the northern front and complete 
demoralization of Ethiopian forces, has intimated 
that it might open peace negotiations but 
will not consider a settlement less favorable than 
the Hoare-Laval deal, denounced by world opinion 
last December as a betrayal of League principles. 


Mr. Eden’s declaration at Geneva indicates that 
Britain now believes the League should go ahead 
with an oil embargo, irrespective of action by the 
United States, in the hope that this move will 
cause the American people to demand limitation 
of our oil exports to Italy. That the Washington 
administration may be contemplating such a 
course is shown by the proclamation which Presi- 
dent Roosevelt issued on February 29, when he 
signed a bill extending the August 31, 1935 neu- 
trality resolution to May 1, 1937, subject to a 
number of amendments. 


The new Act, in addition to reaffirming the imposition 
of an arms embargo against all belligerents whenever a 
“state of war” comes into existence, bans loans and 
credits to warring nations. It will not, however, apply 
to “an American republic or republics engaged in war 
against a non-American state or states, provided the 
American republic is not cooperating with a non-Amer- 
ican state or states in such war’’—thus penalizing any 
Latin American country which endeavors to fulfill its 
obligations as a League member by participating in 
collective action against an aggressor. Nor does the 
new Act give the President power to embargo or limit 
exports of raw materials in time of war. In his Febru- 
ary 29 proclamation the President said that “greatly to 
exceed” the normal basis of trade, “with the result of 
earning profits not possible during peace, and especial- 
ly with the result of giving actual assistance to the 
carrying on of war, would serve to magnify the very 
evil of war which we seek to prevent.” He conse- 
quently renewed the plea he had made to the American 
people last October “that they so conduct their trade 
with belligerent nations that it cannot be said that they 
are seizing new opportunities for profit or that by 
changing their peace-time trade they give aid to the 
continuation of war.”’ 


Should the League, independently of the United 
States, impose an oil embargo on Italy, the Ameri- 
can people will be squarely faced with the ques- 
tion: do we want to accumulate war profits by 
capturing the Italian market for oil, or to avoid 


obstructing League action against an aggressor 


by restricting oil exports to the pre-1935 level? 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 








. FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 19, MarcH 6, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste Bugit, President; EstHeR G. OGpen, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


National 





Contributions to the F. P. A. are deductible in computing income tax. 





B 


di 


bc 


