ee 
$$ __ 


th the 
ttempt 
of the 
od that 
terms 
Id be 
United 
ashing 
mplete 
imated 
is but 
le than 
pinion 
nciples, 


es that 
» ahead 
by the 
ve will 
Litation 
1ington 
such a 
1 Presi- 
hen he 
35 neu- 
ct to a 


position 
enever a 
vans and 
er, apply 
d in war 
ided the 
yn-Amer- 
zing any 
fulfill its 
ating in 
does the 
» or limit 
is Febru- 
reatly to 
result of 
especial- 
e to the 
the very 
le conse- 
American 
eir trade 
that they 
that by 
id to the 


. United 
» Ameri- 
he ques- 
‘ofits by 
to avoid 
rrressor 
5 level? 


DEAN 


4. National 
EAN, Editor. 
Year. 


ee 


| Treaty and the Locarno Pact of 1925. 


FOREIGN POLICY 
, . BULLETIN 


An inter prétatiow of current international events by the members of the 


ep Research Staff 
3 Subscription, One Dollar a Year 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou XVNo. 20 


MarRcH 18, 1936 


Entered as second- 
class matrer December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 

iON Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 


WILL THE DICTATORS WIN? 


THE DANGEROUS YEAR 
by Raymond Leslie Buell 
In this 80-page study, Mr. Buell analyzes conditions in 
Germany, Italy and Soviet Russia, where dictatorship is on 
the march, and in the great democratic countries, which he 
finds confused, uncertain and pacifist. 
es 
Foreign Policy Pamphlets No. 2 


March 1936 


Library of Con 
" ¢ ; - . 


Washineton, D. C. 


WILL THE END OF LOCARNO MEAN WAR? 


te March 13 the League Council will be con- 
fronted by an appeal from the French and 
Belgian governments asking that Nazi Germany 
be punished for its flagrant violation of the 
Rhineland zone demilitarized by the Versailles 
This action 
was suddenly announced on March 7 in a formal 
memorandum presented by the German govern- 
ment to representatives of the Locarno powers 
and Hitler’s speech to the Reichstag. On the same 
day more than 20,000 German troops, as a “sym- 
bolic’ gesture, marched into the Rhineland, 
where the maintenance of any armed forces or 


» fortifications is prohibited by the violated treaties. 


| curity. 


Since the time of Richelieu, the presence of 
Germany on the right bank of the Rhine has been 
an important element in France’s sense of inse- 
At the Paris Peace Conference France 


» attempted to have the Rhineland transformed into 
) an independent buffer state, and only with re- 


wet 


aids ust Gaels 


luctance accepted a compromise providing for 
Allied occupation of the right bank of the Rhine 
—an occupation terminated in 1980—and perma- 
nent demilitarization of a zone on both banks. 
By the terms of the Locarno Pact of 1925, to 


| which Britain, Italy and Belgium are also parties, 
/ Germany and France promised not to resort to 


war against each other except under authority 
from the League, or in self-defense, which in- 
cluded resistance to a flagrant breach of the de- 
militarized zone. In his Reichstag speech of May 


B21, 1935, Hitler declared that Germany would 
» fulfill all obligations “arising out of the Treaty 


Pee Richede- aibhlany 1c tal 


of Locarno so long as the other partners are ready 
to stand by that treaty. The German government 
regards the observance of the demilitarized zone 
as a contribution toward the appeasement of Eu- 
rope of an unheard-of hardness for a sovereign 


B State.” 


The German memorandum of March 7 argued 
that the conclusion of the Franco-Soviet pact, 
Which “was directed exclusively against Ger- 


many,” constituted a violation of the Locarno 
agreement, since it irnposed on France an obliga- 
tion to attack Germany in the absence of a recom- 
mendation by the League Council. As a result, 
the German government no longer considered 
itself bound by the Locarno Pact and, “beginning 
today, restituted full, unmitigated sovereignty of 
the Reich in the demilitarized zone of the Rhine- 
land.” 


At the same time the Reich announced its wil- 
lingness to make new arrangements to safeguard 
European peace, as follows: 

1. A new demilitarized zone applying equally to Ger- 

many, France and Belgium; 

2. A 26-year non-aggression pact with France, Belgium 
and the Netherlands, which Britain and Italy would 
be invited to guarantee; 

3. A western air pact “designed automatically and ef- 
fectively to forestall the danger of a sudden air 
attack”; 

4. Non-aggression pacts with states bordering on the 
east of Germany, including Poland and Lithuania; 

5. Return of Germany to the League of Nations, on the 
understanding that negotiations should subsequently 
clear up the question of “colonial equality” and 
separation of the Covenant from the Treaty of 
Versailles. 


German Fears and Needs 


In his address to a hurriedly assembled Reichs- 
tag, Hitler justified his course by elaborating his 
fears of Soviet Russia. 


It is impossible, he declared, to build a “connecting” 
bridge between the Bolshevik revolution and neigh- 
boring states. Europe is divided into two parts—the 
area dominated by the national cultures of the West- 
ern world, and the area governed by that “intolerable 
Bolshevik doctrine” which preaches “destruction.” 
Despite his repeated efforts to reach an understanding 
with France, he said, France had now made an alliance 
with Russia which constitutes a “fathomless tragedy” 
and may lead to unpredictable consequences. 


While conjuring up these fanciful fears of com- 
munism, Hitler declared that Germany does not want 
war; and recognized that every country has a duty to 
“European culturized civilization.” But Germany has 


two problems which must be solved if peace is to 
be maintained. The first is economic welfare; the 
second, political equality. “Here 67,000,000 people are 
living on a very restricted and not everywhere fertile 
area ... These people are no less industrious than 
other European peoples and also no less insistent upon 
living. They have exactly as little ambition to be 
shot dead heroically in pursuit of a shadow as have 
the French and English.” Although the German eco- 
nomic problem is largely internal, it concerns other 
peoples “so far as the German people by a solution of 
this question is forced economically as a buyer or 
seller to be in connection with other peoples. And 
here it would be in the interest of the world to under- 
stand that ... the cry for bread among a forty, fifty, 
or sixty million population is not a trumped-up piece 
of maliciousness of a regimé . . . but is the natural 
expression of the necessities of the struggle for exist- 
ence.” Twice during his speech he referred to the small 
“space for living” enjoyed by Germany. With regard 
to political equality he declared that the Germans can 
solve the economic problem “only if this people also 
in its relations with other nations possesses a feeling 
of political security and with it of political equality. 
It is impossible forever to deal with or even lead a 
people possessed of honor and of bravery forever as if it 
were made up of helots... If the German people is to 
be of any value for European cooperation, it can have 
this value only as an honor-loving, hence equal, part- 
ner.” Since Germany has now won the struggle for 
equality it is willing to return to a policy of “European 
collective cooperation . . . We have no territorial de- 
mands to make in Europe.” Territorial tensions can- 
not be solved by wars, but should be removed by a 
“slow evolutionary development of peaceful coopera- 


tion.” 

Although violation of the demilitarized zone 
had been expected—indeed it was a logical con- 
sequence of Germany’s decision to re-arm last 
March—Hitler’s decision has precipitated a new 
international crisis. Cancelling army leaves, the 
French government has hurriedly moved 50,000 
troops to the German border. On March 8 the 
French and Belgian governments addressed notes 
to the League asking it to act against the “inten- 


tional” violation of the Versailles and Locarno 
treaties. 


In a radio address of March 8, Premier Sarraut 
of France protested against the “brutal” con- 
tempt of law displayed by Germany, declaring 
that the presence of German soldiers on the Rhine 
“prevents for the moment any negotiations.” By 
contrast, the British Foreign Minister, Mr. Eden, 
in a statement to the House of Commons on 
March 9, after condemning the unilateral viola- 
tion of treaties, declared that the British govern- 
ment would “clear-sightedly and objectively” ex- 
amine Hitler’s new proposals. At the same time 
he stated that, should any “actual attack upon 
France or Belgium” take place, the British gov- 
ernment would come to the assistance of the 
country attacked. On March 10 the signatories 


Page Two 


swe French and 

Le Yrs ,, ee forts 
Woe Y /oemilita 
S rized zone 


\\ 
; 


rankfurtam; 
Ai SMaim 


Uj 
ie 
/) 


7 


4 meni Ker 

o Lae * 
e a 
* AwitZERLAND — 


of the Locarno Pact, with the exception of Ger- 
many, assembled in Paris, but postponed action 
until the Council meets. 


The Liquidation of Unequal Treaties 

Despite Hitler’s open breach, not only of the 
Versailles Treaty but of the voluntarily negoti- 
ated Locarno Pact, it seems unlikely that the 
League Council will authorize a new occupation 
of the Rhineland. In the first place, there are 
certain considerations of equity, if not of law, 
which support the position taken by Hitler. Un- 
der the principle of equality on which Germany 
insists, a demilitarized zone should apply equally 


a BC TN PR 


es ie PEN 


ee OS = eS 


to the French and Belgian sides of the western . 


frontier. But both France and Belgium have 
made this virtually impossible by proceeding with 
the erection of enormous fortifications. Lawyers 
may differ as to whether the Franco-Soviet pac! 
of May 1935 violates the provisions of Locarno 
but politically and psychologically it can hardl; 
be denied that the conclusion of this pact consti 
tuted a serious error from the point of view o! 
collective security. 

In its struggle against the peace settlement of 


FOREIGN POcICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 20, Marcu 13, 


1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lgsiig Bugit, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; Vera MicHE.es Dan, Editor 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 


, under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


Contributions to the F. P. A. are deductible in computing income tax. 


Nation’ & 


of Ger- 
d action 


ies 
y of the 
negoti- 
that the 
cupation 
here are 
of law, 
er. Un- 
yermany 
r equally 
western 
im_ have 
ing with 
Lawyers 
viet pact 
Locarno 
n hardl 


‘t consti: ¥ 


view of 


ement of 


d. Nationa 
DEAN, Editor 
1 Year. 


Ray ame 


oN firs HOF 


ae Wiring Sage 


oe Bepers 


it 


sei re Somatic ik 


employs today. 


1919, Germany is following the example set by 
France following its defeat in the Napoleonic 
Wars. In 1848 the second French republic is- 
sued a manifesto denouncing the peace treaties of 
1214-1815 in much the same terms which Hitler 
Moreover, Soviet Russia repudi- 
ated in wholesale fashion international obliga- 
tions accepted by the Tsarist régime. Treaties 
which violate fundamental considerations of jus- 
tice or prove economically unbearable cannot be 
indefinitely maintained. The present crisis was 
sooner or later inevitable. The question is wheth- 
er it is to be liquidated by repressive measures 
resulting in war or by mutual adjustment. 

In view of the new military and political 
strength of Germany, it seems clear that France 
will not resort to a new occupation of the Rhine- 
land without assistance from other League pow- 
Taking advantage of the weakness of the 
French position, Mussolini is now offering his 
cooperation against Germany on condition that 
the League withdraw economic sanctions against 
Italy. Possibly Ethiopia may be sacrificed on 
behalf of a strong anti-German coalition. Yet in 
several recent statements Mr. Eden has indicated 
Britain’s reluctance to follow this course. At the 
same time, France cannot consistently demand 
sanctions against Germany when it opposed effec- 
tive sanctions against Italy, which committed a far 
greater offense by invading Ethiopia. True, Hit- 
ler has violated several treaties; but he has not 
embarked on a war of aggression in defiance of 
the Covenant or the anti-war pact. The Covenant 
requires the imposition of sanctions only against 
a state which illegally goes to war—which Ger- 
many has not done. 


ers. 


A Negotiated Settlement? 

In view of these various considerations, it would 
appear that the negotiation of a new settlement 
with Germany presents the least danger for the 
immediate future. Despite the violation of the de- 
militarized zone, there is really no serious issue 
concerning the western frontier. Germany has 
no intention of attacking France; it knows—as it 
did not in 1914—that such an attack would be 
resisted by Britain to the utmost. The real ques- 
tion is whether Germany is determined to wage 
war on the Soviet Union and carry out its ambi- 
tions in Central Europe, in accordance with the 
program formulated by Hitler in his autobiog- 
raphy, Mein Kampf. Hitler now insists that Ger- 
many will not seek to change any frontier by 
force, will conclude non-aggression pacts with 
its neighbors and will return to the League. 
Despite his fulmination against bolshevism, he 
does not demand termination of the Franco-Soviet 
alliance, nor the expulsion of the Soviet Union 
from the League. 

Many observers, however, contend that, in view 
of his record both at home and abroad, Hitler’s 
promises cannot be trusted. Assuming that Hit- 


Page Three 


ler is completely insincere in his professions for 
peace and cooperation—an assumption which 
seems doubtful—the answer to this criticism is to 
be found in strengthened collective security, 
which would make it impossible for Germany to 
seize foreign territory, and in world economic 
amelioration, which would reduce the pressure 
for German territorial expansion. 

Notwithstanding the difficulties created by the 
Italian campaign in Ethiopia, collective security 
would be advanced if Britain, together with the 
Soviet Union, France, the Little Entente and the 
Balkan bloc agreed to re-interpret Article XVI 
of the Covenant so as to provide for precise mili- 
tary obligations against aggression in Central 
and Eastern Europe. Confronted by such an 
alignment, Germany—especially if it rejoined the 
League — would find it virtually impossible to 
succeed in absorbing Central Europe and attack- 
ing the U.S.S.R. The general strengthening of 
the Covenant, rather than the conclusion of new 
regional pacts or alliances, points the way to a 
solution of the problem. The prospect for suc- 
cess would be increased if concessions were at the 
same time made in the field of raw materials, 
markets, and colonial mandates. 

Pessimists predict that, despite its strong sanc- 
tions stand against Italy, Britain will decline to 
assume specific commitments with regard to Cen- 
tral and Eastern Europe; that France will refuse 
to undertake any negotiations with Germany un- 
til its troops are withdrawn from the Rhine; that 
Italy will defeat any attempt at European ap- 
peasement unless its aspirations in Ethiopia are 
realized; that Nazi Germany is determined to 
fight the Soviet Union and dominate Central Eu- 
rope. Possibly the pessimists may prove to be 
correct; if so, the world will soon witness another 
general war. On the other hand, if wise states- 
manship and a sense of moderation prevail, the 
year 1936 may see the present crisis liquidated 
and the prospect of a more enduring peace greatly 


enhanced. RAYMOND LESLIE BUELL 


Geographic Disarmament, A Study of Regional Demili- 
tarization, by J. H. Marshall-Cornwall. New York, Ox- 
ford University Press, 1935. $5.00 
Exhaustive survey of a practical method for hindering 

the outbreak of hostilities. 

American Foreign Policy in the Post-War Years, by Frank 
H. Simonds. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins Press, 1935. 
$2.00 
This volume by a distinguished publicist exposes the 

inconsistencies of American policy and pleads for a sane 

program of isolation. 

Germany Today and Tomorrow, by H. A. Phillips. New 
York, Dodd Mead, 1935. $3.00 
The author pleads for a more sympathetic understand- 

ing of Germany. 

The United States in World A fairs, 1934-1935, by W. H. 
Shepardson and W. O. Scroggs. New York, Harper, 
1935. $3.00 
An extremely useful survey published annually by the 

Council on Foreign Relations. 


cade 


STAFF MEMBERS IN THE FIELD 


Since the first of January Mr. Buell has visited 
F.P.A.branches in Boston, Hartford, Utica, Phila- 
delphia, Springfield, Albany, Minneapolis, St. Paul, 
Columbus, Cincinnati, Pittsburgh, Buffalo and 
Elmira. This trip has enabled him to report 
to the branches on his impressions of the Euro- 
pean situation after four months spent in Geneva 
and in visiting various capitals of Europe. On 
March 14 he will speak for the Providence branch. 


Mrs. Dean spent two very interesting days the 
end of February in up-state New York, addressing 
the State Normal School in Potsdam and the 
Women’s Student Government Conference on 
World Problems held at St. Lawrence University 
in Canton, which was attended by representatives 
of five colleges. She also spoke for the Greenwich 
School Forum—a highly successful venture spon- 
sored by the private and public schools of Green- 
wich, Connecticut. 


STAFF MEMBERS IN GENEVA 


In accordance with the plans announced last 
August,* Miss Wertheimer sailed for Europe 
January 3 to remain with the Geneva Research 
Center until April 1, after which she plans to visit 
Germany, Austria and Poland, returning to the 
United States the middle of April. Mr. de Wilde 
of our Research Staff sailed March 4 to take Miss 
Wertheimer’s place in Geneva and will be fol- 
lowed by Mr. Stone, who will be in charge of the 
Center during May and June; Mrs. Dean will 
take up the work of the Center during July, 
August and September. A special grant covering 
traveling expenses has made this cooperation 
with the Geneva Research Center possible. 


POPULAR EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
ACTIVITIES 


The Department has organized 123 Headline 
Book Clubs in twenty-five states and Alaska. It 
will be glad to send information to those inter- 
ested in forming such a club in their community. 

Mrs. Maxwell Stewart, student secretary of the 
Foreign Policy Association, has prepared the 
Study Plan to be used by the National Peace Con- 
ference as a basis for the study project, Can You 
Vote for Peace? The basis for the kit which will 
be provided for each group is Peace in Party 
Platforms, the fourth in the series of HEAD- 
LINE BOOKS. This fourth book will be published 
the last week in March. 


The Foreign Policy Association is sponsoring 
an International Relations Institute in New York 
for members of Women’s National Organizations 
on March 28 in connection with the F. P. A. lunch- 
eon discussion scheduled for that date. The pro- 


*Poreign Policy Bulletin, August 9, 1935. 


F.P.A. NOTES - 


— 


gram will include lectures, round tables and a 
demonstration of the Marathon technique of 
group discussion, using the Can You Vote for 
Peace? projects of the National Peace Conference 
as the subject. We urge all F. P. A. branches 
which have not as yet held an Institute to consider 
sponsoring at least one this year. 


STUDENT CONTESTS 


The Scholastic Contest has produced some very 
interesting headline histories and essays on the 
subject How Can America Keep Out of War? 
High school students from thirty-eight states took 
part in this contest. The judges are now looking 
over the papers and the winner will be announced 
soon. 


The College Editorial Contest, sponsored jointly 
by the F. P. A. and The Nation, on the subject 
Will Neutrality Keep Us Out of War? does not 
end until March 15; papers are already beginning 
to come in from all parts of the country includ- 


ing, we are happy to say, some of our branch 
cities. 


PUBLIC AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 


In an effort to meet the growing demand for 
accurate information on public affairs, a Public 
Affairs Committee has been established, with 
Raymond Leslie Buell as chairman. The pur- 
pose of this committee is to prepare pamphlet 
material, based on the results of long-time 
research, and generally disseminate knowledge 
regarding public questions. The first pamphlet, 
entitled Income and Economic Progress, is 
based on a four-volume study of the Brookings 
Institution. Further pamphlets dealing with so- 
cial and economic problems confronting the 
United States will soon appear. 


In addition to Mr. Buell, the Public Affairs Com- 
mittee is composed of the following individuals: 
Harold G. Moulton (Treasurer), Brookings Insti- 
tution; Lyman Bryson, Columbia University; 
Evans Clark, Twentieth Century Fund; Frederick 
V. Field, American Council, Institute of Pacific 
Relations; William T. Foster, Pollak Foundation; 
Luther Gulick, Institute of Public Administra- 
tion; Felix Morley, Editor, Washington Post; 
George Soule, National Bureau of Economic Re- 
search; Francis Pickens Miller (Executive Sec- 
retary) ; Maxwell S. Stewart (Editor). 


The members of the committee are serving in a 
personal capacity and the organizations with 
which they are connected are in no way respon- 
sible for the activities of the committee. For the 
first year the committee is financed by a grant 
from the Maurice and Laura Falk Foundation. 
Its office is in the National Press Building, Wash- 


ington, D.C. ESTHER G. OGDEN 


4 


| 


a 


An 


aA 


OL 


| 


Mar 


