Fasten 


SSON 


General Library 


APR 3 


LD etait Ad 2nd class matter 


enn University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Mich. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XX, No. 26 


APRIL 18, 1941 


eee TURE of the Soviet-Japanese neutrality pact 
at Moscow on April 13 crowned with success the 
furopean mission of Yosuke Matsuoka, Japanese 
foreign Minister, at the moment when it seemed on 
the verge of failure. Premier Konoye has welcomed 
the new pact as a signal triumph for his Cabinet, 
which desperately needed a diplomatic victory at this 
time to bolster its waning prestige. 

According to the agreement's preamble, the 
US.S.R. and Japan, “guided by a desire to strengthen 
|peaceful and friendly relations between the two 
/ countries, decided to conclude a pact on neutrality.” 
| Article I includes a mutual pledge to respect the “‘ter- 


+ | titorial integrity and inviolability’’ of the signatory 


| powers. The kernel of the pact is contained in Article 
Il, which states: “Should one of the contracting par- 
ties become the object of hostilities on the part of 
ome or several third Powers, the other contracting 


» | party will observe neutrality throughout the duration 
«| of the conflict.” 


The pact enters into effect on rati- 
fication, which is to occur ‘‘as soon as possible” in 
Tokyo, and is valid for five years. In an accompany- 
ing “frontier declaration,” a Soviet pledge ‘‘to respect 
the territorial integrity and inviolability” of Man- 


:\choukuo is matched by a similar pledge on Japan’s 


part toward the Mongolian People’s Republic (Outer 
Mongolia ) . 

TOKYO’S VIEW OF MOSCOW PACT. Con- 
— of this pact opens up a number of possibilities 
for Japan, provided that Tokyo is prepared to exploit 


- | them effectively at this time. It facilitates settlement 


of pending Soviet-Japanese issues; relieves Japan of 
its obligations toward the Axis in the event of a 
Soviet-German clash; and assures Tokyo of Soviet 
neutrality in case of a Japanese conflict with Britain 
or the United States. 

At Tokyo, Premier Konoye greeted the pact as of 
“epoch- maki ing significance” to Soviet-Japanese rela- 
tions, and predicted that it would ‘‘serve as a basis for 


MATSUOKA WINS PACT WITH U.S.S.R. 


rapid solution” of pending questions between the 
two countries. Tokyo evidently hopes that the pact 
will be followed by conclusion of a Soviet-Japanese 
trade treaty, as well as the long-delayed permanent 
fisheries agreement. The frontier declaration, more- 
over, may lead to greater progress in the demarca- 
tion of Manchoukuo’s border than has so far occurred. 

In the second place, the Moscow pact lessens 
Tokyo’s apprehension over the possible outbreak of 
Soviet-German hostilities in Europe. The tripartite 
alliance of September 27, 1940 had obligated Japan 
to come to Germany's aid in case of a Soviet-German 
clash. Recent events in Europe, coupled with the fail- 
ure to bring the U.S.S.R. into the Axis-Japan pact, 
had led Tokyo to fear that such a clash might be 
imminent, and criticism of this feature of the tripar- 
tite alliance had seriously embarrassed the Konoye 
Cabinet. While the Soviet-Japanese neutrality pact 
meets this issue to Tokyo’s satisfaction, it is by no 
means so welcome to Berlin. By dissociating Japan 
somewhat from the orbit of the Axis, it revises the 
tripartite alliance to Germany's disadvantage. Berlin 
had originally thought to induce Moscow to become 
a full-fledged partner in the Axis-Japan alliance, but 
finds instead that Moscow has concluded a separate 
agreement with Tokyo. Thus, for Germany, the use- 
fulness of the Axis-Japan alliance is reduced so far as 
the Soviet Union is concerned, although there may 
be some recompense if the new pact induces Japan to 
attack the Singapore base. 


THE FAR EASTERN OUTLOOK. Tokyo sees a 
third—and possibly the greatest—gain from the pact 
in the sphere of its relations with Britain and the 
United States. It is now free to move against the 
Anglo-American positions in southeast Asia with- 
out fear of a flank attack from the Soviet Union. In 
this respect, Japan derives an advantage similar to 
that which Germany obtained in Europe by the 
Soviet-German pact of August 23, 1939. 


While the similarity exists, there are at the same 
time considerable differences between the two cases, 
and it remains to be seen how far the Moscow pact 
will encourage greater truculence on Tokyo's part 
toward Britain and the United States. The Konoye 
Cabinet is at present engaged in a desperate effort to 
cope with its economic problems. Recent Cabinet 
changes have given Japan’s business interests vir- 
tually a free hand in dealing with the economic crisis. 
Barring a coup d’état, which the extremists might at- 
tempt, Japanese “big business’ will be inclined to 
seek an economic solution in a modus vivendi with 
the United States, rather than risk a Pacific war. 


Nor has the Moscow pact improved Japan’s mil- 
itary position in China. Soviet assistance to China is 
not affected by ‘the pact, and Moscow has assured 


MOSCOW ON ALERT FOR GERMAN DRIVE TO EAST 


After an initial week of Blitzkrieg, the Balkan 
campaign appeared to be developing into a series of 
isolated encounters in mountain sectors, where the 
Greek and Yugoslav armies, still largely intact, were 
attempting, with the aid of the British air force, to 
disrupt German communications. In such a war of 
movement, where Nazi superiority in airplanes and 
motorized equipment depends on maintenance of 
communications with German bases in Bulgaria, Ru- 
mania and Hungary, it was difficult to estimate the 
chances of the belligerents from day to day, or even 
from hour to hour. 

Meanwhile, another lightning advance of German 
motorized units, transported to Italian Libya from 
Sicily, had brought Axis forces into Egyptian territory 
within eighteen days. Profiting by the diversion of 
large portions of the British Imperial Army of the 
Nile to the Balkan and East African fronts, the 
Germans recovered the ground lost by the Italians 
during the winter campaign in Libya, and threatened 
to endanger depleted British forces in Egypt, as well 
as the British fleet based on the Egyptian port of 
Alexandria. 

DISMEMBERMENT OF YUGOSLAVIA. Ger- 
man victories in the Balkans and in Africa, taken in 
conjunction with intensive Nazi propaganda activ- 
ities in the Near East, notably Iraq with its important 
Mosul oil-fields, had immediate repercussions on the 
rapidly fluctuating situation in Europe. On April 10 
German sources reported the formation of a separate 


For a graphic display on Latin America, 
order a set of 


13 MAPS and CHARTS—$1.00 


Enlarged reproductions of illustrations from the 
HEADLINE Book, LOOK AT LATIN AMERICA. 
Use these to awaken interest in our southern neighbors. 


Page Two 


—— 
Chungking it will continue to send war supplies » 
China. Tokyo has gained a pledge of Soviet respeq 
for Manchoukuo’s “territorial integrity and inyig, 
ability,” but this pledge will probably prove of sym. 
bolic significance only. It is still doubtful, despite th, 
pact, whether Tokyo will feel free to transfer trop 
from Manchuria to other fronts in eastern Asia 
The immediate outlook in the Far East is ther 
fore not necessarily critical, so far as the threat of 
Japanese action is concerned. There may be a recny, 
descence of Japan’s efforts to secure strategic bas, 
in Thailand or Indo-China, which would have j 
precede a southward drive. Before challenging thy 
Anglo-American front, however, it seems likely that 
Tokyo will await the outcome of Germany's can, 
paign in the Mediterranean. T. A. Bisson 


pro-Axis state in Croatia. This new state is to he 
headed by Ante Pavelitch, a Croat terrorist who had 
been involved in the murder of King Alexander of 
Yugoslavia in 1934, and had been living in Italy. The 
next day it was indicated that Italy would claim the 
Kossovo region of Yugoslavia, containing about one 
million Albanians, if and when that country is divid. 
ed among the Axis powers. On April 11 Hungary, : 
member of the Axis group, profited by chaos in the 
Balkans to invade a strip of land in northern Yugo 
Slavia which that country had taken from Hungary 
under the peace treaties of 1919. By utilizing the re 
visionist ambitions of its allies—Italy, Hungary ani 
Bulgaria—Germany apparently intends to break up 
Yugoslavia and Greece into several parts, which 
could then be forced to join Hitler’s ‘‘new order.” 
In this emergency, Britain and its Balkan allies te 
ceived no hint of aid from Turkey. The Turkish | 
government continues to cling to its decision not to 
enter the conflict unless its territory is attacked. lt 
is possible, however, that Germany may avoid out 
right attack on Turkey, and seek to win it over by! 
offering attractive terms of trade, and even a shatt 
of British-dominated territories in the Near East. | 


MOSCOW’S REBUKE TO HUNGARY. Tut} 
key’s decision still hinges on the policy of the Sovie 
Union, which also has an interest in the fate of the 
Straits and the Black Sea. Moscow, after signing ! 
treaty of nonaggression with Turkey on March 24 
and a pact of friendship with Yugoslavia on April 6, 
on the eve of the German invasion, has express¢d) 


its sympathy for the Yugoslavs and its disapprovd 
of Bulgaria’s action in permitting German occupt| 
tion of its territory. A further step in the direction 
of what might be described as oblique and passitt 
opposition to German penetration in the Balkans wis 
taken on April 12, when the Soviet government oft 
cially notified Hungary that the movement of Hut 
garian troops into Yugoslavia had created “a partic 


——— 


larly bad 
Soviet af 
Vishinsk: 
added: * 
the posit 
trouble a 
are natic 
day it w 
and the $ 
Berlin a 
with the 
The § 
to territ 
yakia fo! 
Award 
many ai 
Rutheni 
river po 
present 
ward sec 
awardec 
Empire 
mixed i 
and rel. 
slovak | 
more tl 
709,128 
jans. T 
cruited 
strong, 
polled 
over 30 
have be 
Russia 
cause © 
it was | 
the Ge 
jumpin 
ment dc 
the U.: 
nation: 
viet gc 
grounc 
linguis 
WI 
govern 
1939 t 
many, 
Nor w 
Germ: 
of the 


wear | 


FOREIG! 
Headqua: 
Entered | 


> 


—_—_ 


—_} Page Three 


lies | larly bad impression’”’ in Russia and could not receive . 

espeq Soviet approval. In issuing this. statement, Andrei P.P.A. Radio Schedule 

invig,| Vishinsky, Vice Commissar of Foreign Affairs, Subject: U.S. WEIGHS MEDITERRANEAN CRISIS 
f sy, added: “It is not difficult to realize what would be ela y agatrheeen. 

» Syti- ti fH il stan te if : Date: Sunday, April 20 

ite the the position o ungaty should she herse get into Time: 2:15 p.m., E.S.T. 

troops trouble and be torn to bits, since it is known that there Station: NBC, blue network 

ia, are national minorities in Hungary, too.” The same 


ther,| day it was announced that the German Ambassador 
eat of} and the Slovak Minister to Moscow were returning to 
tecn,| Berlin and Bratislava respectively for consultation 
> bass} with their governments. 

ave )) | The Soviet warning to Budapest probably refers 
Ng th} to territory recovered by Hungary from Czechoslo- 


way to try to bring Russia into the war on Britain’s 
side. For the Soviet government has not forgotten 
that, during the period of civil war and intervention 
after 1918 the British themselves sought to obtain 
control of the Caucasian oil-fields. 


ly that| vakia following the Munich accord. Under the Vienna It is conceivable, however, that if the Balkan cam- 
$ cam} Award of November 2, 1938, arranged by Ger- paign should drag on, the Soviet Union might im- 
son | many and Italy, Hungary was assigned a part of prove its own position on the West by claiming ter- 
Ruthenia and southern Slovakia (excluding the large ritory from Hungary and making additional demands 
river port of Bratislava, which is the capital of the on Rumania. Such a move might strike at Nazi com- 
to be} present state of Slovakia). Ruthenia, the most back- munications from the rear. It might also give Mos- 
ho had} ward section of Czechoslovakia—to which it had been cow an entering-wedge for Communist propaganda 
der of} awarded on the break-up of the Austro-Hungarian among peoples who have sub-marginal standards of 
y. The, Empire in 1919—has a population extraordinarily living and have already shown interest in the kind 
im th| mixed in language, racial origins, political sympathies of peasant collectivism that has been developed in 
ut one/ and religious affiliations. According to the Czecho- the Soviet Union. 


| divid-| slovak census of 1930, on the basis of nationality 
gary,1| more than half of Ruthenia’s total population of 
in the} 709,128 consisted of Ruthenes, Russians and Ukrain- 
Yugo ians. The Communist movement in Ruthenia, re- 
ungay| cruited largely from Ukrainians, was relatively 
the re strong, and in the elections of 1935 the Communists 
ty and} polled nearly 80,000 votes out of a total of a little 
eak up} over 300,000. The major trends among the Ruthenes 
which} have been in the direction of integration either with 
ler.” | Russia or with an independent Ukrainian state. Be- 
lies te| cause of pro-Ukrainian sympathies among Ruthenes 
“urkish} it was thought at the time of the Vienna Award that 
not)! the Germans would eventually use Ruthenia as a 
ked. It} jumping-off place for a Ukrainian nationalist move- 
id out} ment designed to separate the Soviet Ukraine from 
yer by} the U.S.S.R. Moscow’s hint on April 12 regarding 
1 shat} ational minorities in Hungary indicates that the So- 
East. | viet government may lay claim to Ruthenia on the 


Tur) ground that many of its people have racial and Union, which at Munich appeared to have been 


‘Sovit| linguistic ties with Russia. relegated to Asia by both Germany and the Western 
of the WILL RUSSIA ACT IN EUROPE? The Soviet powers. The Soviet Union intends to preserve its neu- 


It is against this background of European develop- 
ments that Russia’s attitude toward its neutrality pact 
with Japan must be weighed. Whatever Russia's 
form of government, its foreign policy is necessarily 
conditioned by its geographic position—the position 
of a landlocked continent lying between Europe and 
Asia. Under no circumstances can Russia become in- 
volved in a situation which would expose it to war 
on both the European and Far Eastern fronts. While 
the Soviet-Japanese pact frees Japan for a drive into 
southeast Asia, it also frees the Soviet Union for pos- 
sible action in Eastern Europe. Should such action 
involve Russia in hostilities with Germany, then 
Japan, by the terms of the pact, would be bound to 
remain neutral. In that sense, the. pact is,.as Premier 
Konoye has said, “epoch-making.”’ It reaffirms what 
has been increasingly evident since 1939: that is, the 
return to the European diplomatic scene of the Soviet 


ming 4} government is no more anxious today than it was in trality. It hopes that the war will exhaust both the 

ch 24) 1939 to become engaged in a major conflict with Ger- actual belligerents in the West and the potential 

\pril 6 | many, least of all for the sake of the British Empire. belligerents in the East—Japan and the United States. 

resid Nor was Mr. Churchill’s statement of April 9—that But this does not mean that it will passively accept 

)proval Germany might now attempt to secure “the granary the ‘new order” Hitler is seeking to build in Eastern 

ccupt| of the Ukraine and the oil-fields of the Caucasus to Europe and the Balkans. 

rectil) wear down the English-speaking world’—a tactful VERA MICHELES DEAN 

passive 

ns was FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 26, Aprit 18, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 

nt off Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

Hut Bw | 81 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 

partic F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


Apr. 14.—The task of fulfilling promises of effec- 
tive aid to all opponents of the Axis became more 
complicated last week-end as Washington weighed 
the military effect of Nazi gains in the Balkans and 
North Africa and the political consequences of the 
Soviet-Japanese neutrality pact. On the assumption 
that control of the seas will continue to be the 
decisive factor, regardless of the outcome of military 
operations on the continents of Europe and Asia, 
the Administration is directing its chief action toward 
keeping open lines of sea and air communication 
between the United States and the British Empire. 


GREENLAND—AND BEYOND. The most de- 
cisive step yet taken to assure control of vital mari- 
time routes was the Executive Agreement signed here 
on April 9 by Secretary Hull and Henrik de Kauf- 
mann, the Danish Minister, giving the United States 
the right to establish air bases and other military and 
naval facilities in Greenland. Precipitated by evidence 
of recent reconnaissance flights by German airplanes, 
the accord was entered into by the Danish Minister 
after concurrence by Danish authorities in Greenland, 
but without prior consultation with the German-con- 
trolled government at Copenhagen. The State De- 
partment, standing upon its declared recognition of 
the “sovereignty of the Kingdom of Denmark over 
Greenland,” strongly supported the Minister when 
he refused to comply with orders from the Copen- 
hagen Foreign Office demanding his recall, and an- 
nounced it would continue to recognize him. 


The practical effect of the agreement—apart from 
blocking a possible German occupation of the island 
—is to place Greenland under the protective custody 
of the United States for the duration of the war. In 
addition, it extends the area of American military 
operations well into the Arctic Circle and eastward 
in the Atlantic to within three miles of the Nazi- 
proclaimed blockade zone. Establishment of Amer- 
ican bases in Greenland will not only flank the 
Great Circle route between Europe and North Amer- 
ica, but may also provide stepping stones for airplane 
deliveries to England during the summer months. 
Recent surveys conducted by the Coast Guard are 
said to show that air operations may be feasible for 
about half of the year. While it is considered im- 
practical to send large convoys by way of Greenland, 
one apparent result of the agreement will be the 
formation of an American naval and air patrol strong 
enough to release British naval vessels now operating 


in the western half of the Atlantic. And the political 
corollary of this move, according to reports on Cap. 
itol Hill, will be a campaign to convince the country 
of the need for full convoying in the near future. 


OTHER MOVES SHORT OF CONVOY. Mean. 
while, until public opinion has had time to adjust to 
the new situation, other decisive moves have been 
made to meet the shipping and transportation crisis 
without resort to American convoys. On April 10 
President Roosevelt sent a message to Congress ask- 
ing for legislation to permit him to requisition for 
American service any foreign ships in American 
waters deemed necessary for national defense. If 
Congress grants this request—which it is expected 
to do within the next two weeks—the government 
will have legislative authority to take possession, 
with due compensation, of the Danish, German and 
Italian vessels seized on March 30, and approximate 
ly 133 other foreign ships now in American ports, 
The latter, however, include 73 Norwegian vessels 
most of which are operating under an agreement 
with the British, as well as 7 Yugoslav freighters 
which will be released with war materials for that 
country. The remainder of the foreign fleet consists 
of 19 French, 24 Dutch, 2 Belgian, 1 Rumanian, and 
7 or 8 Estonian and Lithuanian ships which have been 
claimed by the Soviet Union since its occupation of 
the Baltic countries last year. 

A third significant move was announced on April 
11, when President Roosevelt issued a proclamation 
removing the combat zone at the entrance to the Red 
Sea. This action, taken immediately after British 
forces had captured the port of Massawa in Italian 
East Africa, will permit American vessels to carry sup- 
plies to the Suez Canal Zone area. Under the terms of 
the Neutrality Act of 1939—still on the statute books 
although virtually nullified by the Lease-Lend Act— 
American merchant ships are forbidden to carry wat 
materials to belligerents and some question was 
raised in Congress as to the legality of shipments in 
American bottoms for ultimate delivery to belligerent 
nations. All such legal doubts were brushed aside at 
the White House, however, where prompt action was 
assured. In other quarters it was reported that as soon 
as Congress passes the enabling legislation, most of 
the 39 Danish ships will be placed in the supply set- 
vice to Suez. 

The question which haunted Washington as it 
read dispatches from Africa, however, was whether 
the promised aid would arrive in time. 


W. T. STONE 


———— 
Vou. XX, - 
he A 


Y con 

Mini 
Park on 
panded h 
fense of t 
joint com 
ence, ‘it 
mobilizin 
try shoul. 
that it is 
| duce quic 
| be coord 
vides tha 
months 
$300,000 
—includ: 
materials 
required 
The agre 
under th 
used by 


and mun 


FINA 
official s 
ing finas 
United § 
chases 
Canada 
| fense pu 
| Becau 
| extensio 
pressed 
port sur 
to Over 
Domini 
and Am 
with th 
imports 


