FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


Entered as second- 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
> he 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated N. Y., under the act 


of March 3, 1879. 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


Vou. XVII, No. 1 


— 


OcTOBER 29, 1937 


STUDY PACKETS for HEADLINE BOOKS 


These Study Packets contain interesting, new suggestions 
for your International Relations programs. 


A Study Packet may be obtained for each Headline Book, 
and includes a complete discussion program for four meet- 


ings, interesting tests, charts and group projects. 


Headline Books 25c. 


Study Packets 15c. 


- DICTATORSHIPS BEAR DOWN ON DEMOCRACIES 


t eu visit paid to Rome on October 22 by Herr 
von Ribbentrop, Hitler’s Ambassador in London, 
lifted the fog of European diplomacy just long 
enough to reveal the main outlines of the agreement 
probably reached by the two dictators during their 
September interview. Reports of the Ribbentrop 
yisit—which coincided with that of the Japanese 
Ambassador in Berlin, Viscount Mushakoji— indi- 
cate that Hitler is to support Mussolini’s efforts on 
behalf of General Franco; that Italy, in return, is to 
give Germany a free hand in Central and Eastern 
Europe; that the two Fascist powers intend to make 
no further concessions in the London non-interven- 
tion committee; and that Italy, which has been in- 
vited to the nine-power conference in Brussels, is to 
keep in close touch with Germany, bound to Japan 
by the anti-Communist pact of November 1936. 


The effects of Italo-German collaboration have 
already made themselves felt in Spain. On Octo- 
ber 20, when Gijon had not yet fallen to the Rebels, 
Italy displayed an attitude optimistically described 
by the British as conciliatory. It agreed to defer the 
issue of belligerent rights until ‘token’ withdrawals 
of an equal number of foreign volunteers had been 
made from both sides, and two international com- 
missions appointed by the London committee had 
checked the number of volunteers in Spain with a 
phew to undertaking a “‘substantial” withdrawal. On 
October 22, however, a new deadlock was created 
when Italy insisted that this plan be unanimously 
accepted by all nine members of the sub-committee. 
M. Maisky, Soviet Ambassador to London, insisted 
that “token’’ withdrawals should be proportional, 
“ equal, and refused to consider the grant of bel- 
ligerent rights until all and not merely a “‘substan- 
tal” number of volunteers had been withdrawn. 
Moreover, Italy, Germany, Portugal and the U.S.S.R. 
announced that they would not be bound by the 


figures of the two international commissions. By 
dickering about minor issues, Germany and Italy 
hope to gain time for General Franco, placate the 
British, and place the responsibility for eventual 


breakdown of the London negotiations on the Soviet 
Union, which is more and more reluctant to tolerate 
the fiction of Italian non-intervention in Spain. 


Equally productive of complications is the new 
clash between Germany and Czechoslovakia. On 
October 11 two prominent members of Konrad Hen- 
lein’s Sudeten Deutsche party had been arrested on 
charges of committing homosexual offenses—which 
recalled similar charges brought by Hitler against 
Roehm in 1934; and the German government had 
protested against unflattering representations of 
Goering and other Nazi dignitaries at a Prague ex- 
hibition of cartoons. Over the weekend of Octo- 
ber 16 a meeting of Henlein party leaders was held 
at Teplitz-Schoenau where, in the course of a demon- 
stration previously prohibited by the authorities, sev- 
eral Sudeten Deutsche deputies are said to have been 
beaten by the police. German newspapers denounced 
this as ‘‘a barbarous provocation” which Germany 
did not propose “‘to tolerate.” In a letter addressed 
to President Benes on October 18 Henlein declared 
that the incident was “unbearable for a brave 
people,” and demanded immediate autonomy for the 
3,500,000 Germans in Czechoslovakia, 80 per cent 
of whom he claims to represent. The Czechoslovak 
protest of October 20 against the “aggressive and 
menacing’ German press campaign was dismissed 
by Baron von Neurath as “‘unjustified.” Prague’s deci- 
sion to postpone municipal elections scheduled for 
November 14 in 500 communities, and to prohibit 
all political meetings for two weeks, raised a new 
storm in Germany. The Reich press asserted that 
a small state like Czechoslovakia would never dare 
to defy Germany if it did not enjoy the support of 


France and the U.S.S.R., and contended that the 
situation of the Sudeten Deutsche is a threat to Ev- 
ropean peace. Germany apparently hopes to con- 
vince Britain—where Henlein has sought to arouse 
sympathy for his movement—that European ap- 
peasement can be achieved only by giving Hitler a 
free hand in Central Europe. 

The fate which may be in store for Czechoslovakia 
was graphically demonstrated last week in Danzig, 
which is being rapidly transformed into a German 
totalitarian state. The efforts of Danzig Nazis to 
suppress all non-Nazi elements—which had already 
resulted in the dissolution of Communist, Social 
Democratic and Nationalist organizations — were 
crowned with success on October 21, when the Catho- 
lic Center party, last stronghold of opposition, was 
coerced into dissolving itself. The immediate pre- 
text for this anti-Catholic, as well as anti-Polish 
drive, was the creation by the Bishop of Danzig of 
two new Polish parishes to serve the Polish-speaking 
population. With the disappearance of the Catho- 
lic Center party, the only political groups in the field 
are the Nazis, who in the 1935 elections won 43 out 
of 72 seats in Parliament, and the Poles, who have 
only two seats, and may now prepare for an early 
demise. The Nazi victory was immediately cele- 
brated by a drive against Jews, both German and 
Polish, who are to be segregated in “ghetto” mar- 
kets. These various measures brought no protest 
from the new League Commissioner, Professor 
Burckhardt, who in 1937 replaced the fighting Irish- 
man Sean Lester, driven out for his efforts to defend 
democracy in the Free City. Nor has any protest 
been lodged by Poland, which is busy with the de- 
velopment of its own port of Gdynia, and has re- 
cently veered to an authoritarian régime, one of 
whose first acts was the establishment of “ghetto 
benches” for Jewish students in Polish high schools 
and universities. 

The knottiest problem presented by Nazi activi- 
ties outside Germany is how to combat the encroach- 
ments of the Hitler dictatorship without adopting 
its own methods. The experience of the German 
Social Democrats who, having declined to use force 
against Hitler, were then suppressed by outwardly 
constitutional means, has not been lost on Germany's 
neighbors, where anti-Nazi groups are girding them- 
selves to use force if necessary. A reductio ad ab- 
surdum is reached when Germany, where freedom 
of speech, press and assembly has been unknown 
since 1933, denounces the Prague government for 
limiting the activities of a group which, no matter 
how legitimate its grievances, clearly intends to 
break up the Czechoslovak state with the active co- 
operation of the Third Reich. The indirect but 
highly successful methods employed by Germany in 
Danzig and Czechoslovakia, by Germany and Italy 


Page Two 


ee 
——— 


in Spain, show that today expansion may be effected 
without a single shot, provided the great powers which 
at one time might have taken up the cudgels in de. 
fense of victims of aggression can be immobilized by 


constant threats of war. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


JAPAN TIGHTENS GRIP IN NORTH CHINA 

Despite stiffened Chinese resistance on the north. 
ern fronts, Japan’s military machine continues to 
make gains which will enable it to present the fai 
accompli of extensive conquest to the forthcomin 
conference at Brussels. An important phase of the 
northern campaign reached its climax on October 23, 
when a mass meeting at Kweisui, capital of Suiyuan, 
proclaimed the independence of that province from 
China, opposition to communism, and a determina. 
tion to establish a new government based on ancient 
Chinese precepts exalted in the imperial ritual of 
Manchoukuo. The new Japanese-controlled area not 
only provides a buffer flanking both China proper 
and the Soviet Union—powers which, in alliance, 
would constitute a potent threat to Japan on the 
continent—but also lays the basis for eventual estab- 
lishment of a single North Chinese-Manchoukuan 
kingdom. 

Elsewhere in the north the Japanese success, while 
undeniable, has not been so complete. Mobile col-) 
umns attempting to reach Taiyuan, capital of rich 
and strategic Shansi, have driven toward that city 
through mountainous territory from the north and 
east. Provincial troops and strong detachments of 
the former Chinese Red Army, which at first of- 
fered little opposition to the Japanese advance, have 
now struck back with a combination of frontal re- 
sistance tactics and harassing raids on the extended 
Japanese lines of communication, forcing the Jap 
anese to halt while consolidating their positions. 
Meanwhile, the rapid Japanese advance along the 
two railways leading south from Peiping and Tien 
tsin has been markedly retarded as it approaches the ) 
Yellow River. Chinese determination to make 4 
stand before this natural barrier, signalized by the 
dispatch of prominent national military leaders to 
the area, has been strengthened by a declaration of 
Han Fu-chu, governor of Shantung, reaffirming his 
loyalty to the central government despite Japanese \ 
efforts to secure his neutrality. 

Farther south, on the Shanghai battlefront, 4 
Japanese attack which began on October 21 wai 
slowly forcing the Chinese backward from strongly 
defended lines and threatened to outflank the 
Chinese right wing in Chapei. Military observes 5 
were united in their opinion that the results of two 
months of Japanese frontal offensives in this sectot 
were scarcely commensurate with the efforts pu 
forth by attackers, now estimated to number 150,000. 
At the same time it was clear that a far larger num 

(Continued on Page 4) 


—<$<—<—— 


© effected 
ers which 
els in de. 
vilized by 
DEAN 
CHINA 
he north. 
tinues to 
t the fait 
thcoming 
se of the 
tober 23, 
Suiyuan, 
nce from 
etermina- 
M ancient 
ritual of 
| area not 
la proper 
alliance, 
n on the 


ual estab- 
choukuan 


ess, while 
obile col- 
1 of rich 
that city 
orth and 
ments of 
- first of- 
nce, have 
rontal re- 
extended 
the Jap 
positions. 
long the 
ind Tien- 
aches the 

make a 
>d by the 
eaders to 
ration of 
rming his 
Japanese 


efront, 4 
cr 21 was 
1 strongly 
flank the 
observers 
Its of two 
his sectot 
forts put 
r 150,000. 
rger num 


/ 


W ashington News Letter 


sibbes, 


, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 25—While development of the Administra- 
tion’s Far Eastern policy apparently marks time— 
in deference to the nine-power conference soon to 
open at Brussels — speculation in Washington is 
centering on what Congress will have to say in the 
special session scheduled for November 15. The new 
and “‘stronger’’ foreign policy forecast in the Presi- 
dent’s Chicago speech will of course bring protest 
from the Nye-Clarke-Vandenberg neutrality forces. 
But soundings made in the ‘“‘back-home”’ areas indi- 
cate that opposition may arise from other groups 
as well. A number of legislators, aroused by what 
is termed the President's ‘‘nullification” of the Neu- 
trality Act, are disposed to debate the larger issue 
concerning the part which Congress will play in the 
formulation of foreign policy. If President Roose- 
velt seeks to drive ahead along the line suggested 
at Chicago, he may find himself faced with another 
Wilsonian struggle; and with opposition coming 
not only from old-line ‘‘isolationists” like Hiram 
Johnson, but from other Senators and Congressmen, 
notably those representing sentiment in the mid-West. 
Again, the general relations between the President 
and Congress resulting from jockeying for the 1938 
and 1940 elections is expected to affect—if not deter- 
mine—the stands taken in foreign policy. Much may 
depend on what the President's policy, together with 
changing events, requires him to ask of Congress. 


The Philadelphia Inquirer polls Congress. In 
the light of such a possible conflict, Washington 
observers are following with close interest the 
weather-vane of public opinion. The echoes of 
President Roosevelt's “quarantine’’ speech at Chi- 
cago had hardly died down before efforts began to 
assess, and mobilize, reactions to that utterance. 
Most interesting of such attempts was the telegraphic 
poll of the views of members of Congress, taken 
by the Philadel phia Inquirer on the question: 
or gama of United States and League of Nations 
condemning Japan as aggressor in Far East war prove in- 
effectual, would you favor or oppose our co-operating with 
League either in sanctions or active intervention ?” 

The result, which was highly publicized as a sort 
of test vote on sanctions, came out: No, 74; Yes, 33; 
Noncommittal, 13. Only one of the 33 yes voters 
was willing to support military sanctions. The catch 
in evaluating this poll lies in the fact that, under 
the circumstances, many members of Congress were 
hardly free to express their views. At the moment, 


few politicians in office could have had the hardi- 
hood to cast their vote publicly for sanctions or “ac- 
tive intervention” merely on the ground of the Presi- 
dent's relatively vague statements. Most Democrats, 
offered the sour choice between the interventionist po- 
sition and helping a Republican newspaper adminis- 
ter another check to the President, naturally chose to 
keep silent. None of the Democratic leaders of the 
House returned an answer. Replies were received 
from less than a fourth of the members of Congress, 
and of these only 19 were Senators. Of the Senators, 
8 voted each way and 3 were noncommittal. Eleven 
of the 13 in the “noncommittal” total were Demo- 
crats, aS were an immense majority of those who 
did not answer. Many of these have probably not 
made up their minds on Far Eastern policy; and 
the President clearly has powerful means of swing- 
ing them over into support if he decides to try an 
interventionist course. Under these circumstances, 
informed circles here feel it is too much to assume 
that the block of anti-sanctionist opinion expressed 
in this poll necessarily means a majority in Congress. 


Other straws in the wind. The New York Times 
and Dr. George Gallup’s American Institute of 
Public Opinion have undertaken other canvasses. 
On October 17 the Times published short analyses 
of public reactions to the President's speech in 
each of the twelve Federal Reserve Districts. These 
reports reflected the vagueness of the public mind 
when not confronted with clear-cut proposals. How- 
ever, expressions were firm and virtually unanimous 
against any policy involving the risk of military 
action. Economic sanctions were neither explicitly 
favored nor rejected; the general attitude was one 
of caution and reserve. The public seemed not 
to be afraid of negotiations under the Nine-Power 
Treaty, but skeptical that, in the absence of addi- 
tional coercive action, such talks will stop war in 
China. 


Sympathy for China grows. Between Septem- 
ber 12 and October 24, a rapid fluctuation of public 
opinion toward Japan and China was reflected in 
polls taken by the American Institute of Public 
Opinion. The voters were asked: 

“In the present fight between Japan and China are your 
sympathies with either side?” 

Answers to the first, taken before the Chicago 
speech, revealed that 55 per cent sympathized with 
neither side, 43 per cent with China and two per cent 
favored Japan. Six weeks later the proportion of 


) 
) 


—— 
 —— 


“neutrals” had declined to 40 per cent, 59 per cent 
expressed sympathy with China and one per cent 
with Japan. That few voters were willing to ‘“im- 
plement” their sympathy for China by even the 
mildest action against Japan was suggested by an- 
other poll announced the same day. Asked whether 
they intended to boycott Japanese-made goods, only 
37 per cent said yes and 63 per cent no. In general, 
the results of the polls of the American Institute of 
Public Opinion suggest the continuing strength of 
isolationist sentiment throughout the country. 


While these indices may reflect with considerable 
accuracy the popular opinion of the moment, it is the 
opinion of observers here that the alternative courses 
facing the Administration at Washington have not 
yet been presented with sufficient clearness to allow 
the mass of the people to form a considered opinion. 
If it is the intention of the President and his advisers 
to use coercion on Japan, they apparently still face a 
formidable task in. “educating” the public to support 
such a program. 


JAPAN TIGHTENS GRIP IN NORTH CHINA 
(Continued from Page 2) 


ber of Chiang Kai-shek’s best troops, who might 
have been used in the north, the principal theater of 
operations, were riveted to the spot by the tactics of 
their opponents. 


Little-noticed but important auxiliary measures 
recently taken by Japan’s navy and air force in the 
south are also likely to have vital bearing on both 
the future of the war and the course of power poli- 
tics in the South Pacific. The traffic in munitions 


Page Four 


_—_— 
— 


imports destined for China via Hongkong—the only 


practicable route remaining open for the acquisition — 


of heavy materials in large quantities—is being te. 
duced in scope by repeated bombing of the rail. 
roads leading from Canton and Kowloon to the 
battle areas. Moreover, following Japan’s seizure of 
Pratas Island, a potential air and submarine base 
flanking the sea route from Hongkong to Manila and 
Singapore, Chinese observers have noted with alarm 
that Japanese naval vessels are cruising in numbers 
near the large undeveloped island of Hainan. With 
its strategic location off the coast of French Indo. 
China this island may become an outpost of prime 
importance in the Japanese navy’s drive to the south, 
as well as a source of rice, sugar and rubber. 
Busily engaged in tightening its grip on China 
north of the Yellow River and tentatively exploring 
possibilities in the south, Japan has every reason 
to delay any action which might be taken by the 
conference now scheduled to meet at Brussels on or 
after November 3. A formal invitation to the con- 
ference, delivered in Tokyo on October 21, did not 
elicit a definite response from the Japanese gov- 
ernment. In view of reiterated British and Ameti- 
can insistence that mediation rather than coercive 
tactics would be undertaken at Brussels, observers 
suspect that Tokyo is attempting to win assurances 
of general agreement to some form of Japanese con- 
trol in North China before accepting the Belgian 
invitation. Anomalous as it is, the spectacle of a 


conference summoned under the Nine-Power Pact, | 


which may seek to gain universal assent to the further 
disintegration of China, appears likely to confront 


the world. Davip H. Popper 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Discovering South America, by Lewis R. Freeman. 
York, Dodd, Mead, 1937. $3.00 
An informative travel book, of particular interest to 
the business man. 
The Third Reich, by Henri Lichtenberger. New York, The 
Greystone Press, 1937. $3.00 
Professor Lichtenberger has written by far the best and 
most dispassionate account of Hitler’s Germany that has 
yet appeared. 


Economische Politiek in Belgié in de Depressie, by 


H. M. H. A. van der Valk. Haarlem, The Netherlands, 
De Erven F. Bohn, 1935. 


A thorough study of Belgium’s struggle against the de- 
pression. 

Handbook of Latin American Studies. Edited by Lewis 
Hanke. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1936. 
$3.00 
An annotated bibliography of material published in 

1935 in the fields of literature and the social sciences. 


New 


International Relations since the Peace Treaties, by E. H. 
Carr. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $2.75 
A competent and very concise history of international 
relations since the World War, written chiefly for laymen 
by a former official in the British Foreign Office. 


The Foreign Policy of Czechoslovakia, 1918-1935, by Felix 
John Vondracek. New York, Columbia University 
Press, 1937. $5.00 


An excellent study of post-war Central Europe. 
documented. 


Well 


Source Book on European Governments, by Rappard, 
Sharp, Schneider, Pollock and Harper. New York, 
Van Nostrand, 1937. $3.50 


Fills a serious need of college classes in European gov- 
ernments for collected readings on the governments of 
Switzerland, France, Italy, Germany and the Soviet 
Union. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 1, OcrosEr 29, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOnpD Lgsitigz BUELL, President; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 
Entered as second-class matter 
Two Dollars a Year. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


FC 


Spait 
tions 
of tl 
Octo 


| Fran 
| belli 
soon 
with 
repo 
with 
Stan: 
| the | 
the : 
isol 
Ribt 
unat 
for 
the | 
SSS! 
| with 
volu 
fron 
tang 
was 
Spai 
* dray 
entl 
| post 


