


1a- 
eX- 
ed. 
ent 
ent 
tal 
art 
an- 

19 
"he 


»m- 


ing 


nit, 
ade 


the 
tely 
apI- 
the 
can 
t in 
rity 
dif- 


1eN. 
ned 
tiCS, 
ele- 
rva- 
vila 
pre- 
r of 
to 
ent 
‘illo 
the 
ion. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
Ure William We Bishop De 


TT 


University of Wichigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. $ 


FOREIGN PO LICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXI, No. 7 


— 


DECEMBER 5, 1941 





JAPAN MAKES FATEFUL CHOICE 


oe vigorous statements from Tokyo, presag- obstruct the construction of the New Order.” 


ing refusal to accept Secretary Hull's proposals In view of these reactions from Tokyo, coupled 
for a Far Eastern settlement, overt Japanese military with the evident finality attaching to the terms pre- 
moves in the south Pacific were still delayed as the sented by Secretary Hull, the scope for further nego- 
aitical month of November passed into history. The tiations has been narrowed almost to the vanishing 
spid massing of Japanese troops and supplies in point. If the negotiations are suspended, there is no 
Indo-China had given rise to fears that Tokyo was certainty that war will follow immediately. There 
preparing further military aggression even while ne- can be no doubt, however, that preparations for that 
gotiations were being held in Washington. Japan's eventuality have been speeded up on both sides dur- 
renewed adherence to the anti-Comintern pact on ing the past few weeks. 
November 25, an act reaffirming its close ties with Of these moves, by far the most significant has 
the Axis, dealt another blow to the Washington been the dispatch of large Japanese reinforcements 
parleys. As American authorities indicated that they to Indo-China. Within a period of five days toward 
were prepared to counter any futther Japanese mili- the close of November, 30,000 additional Japanese 
tary stroke, there was some evidence that Tokyo troops were estimated to have debarked at Saigon 
might hesitate to force an immediate conflict. and other ports in southern Indo-China. At the end 


of the month a Japanese army of from 150,000 to 
ARMED TRUCE OR WAR? Events during the 200,000 men was thought to be occupying the 





last crucial week of November, however, had seemed French colony, as compared with the 40,000 original- 


to end hopes for:a settlement of the Far Eastern ly announced as the force of occupation. The fact 
| crisis, even if negotiations temporarily continued. that the bulk of these troops has been concentrated 
|A new situation was forming in which, if outright in the south indicates that an invasion of Thailand 
wat were avoided, the alternative might be a pre- is contemplated, although a separate (or simultane- 


carious armed truce. ous) drive northward into Yunnan province might 


Tokyo’s rejection of Secretary Hull’s conditions also threaten the Burma Road. Up to the beginning 


| for a settlement was implied in statements made of December, the Japanese command had restricted 

by Premier Tojo and Foreign Minister Togo follow- its operations to bombing raids against Kunming 
ing lengthy Cabinet sessions. The Premier declared and the Burma Road. It still hesitated to launch the 
on November 30, in an extremely belligerent state- invasion of Thailand or the all-out drive against the 
ment, that Japan would have to “purge with a ven- Burma Road which might precipitate a general con- 
geance’” American and British interference in Asi- flict with the British, American and Dutch forces. 
atic affairs. “Nothing can be permitted to interfere” 
with Japan’s co-prosperity sphere in East Asia, he STRATEGIC POSSIBILITIES. If Japan chooses 
sid, “because this sphere was decreed by Provi- now to take military action, it will presumably act 
dence.” In similar vein, on December 1, Foreign on the hope that united resistance will not be of- 
Minister Togo “regretted” that the United States fered by the democracies. Yet the Washington state- 
was “trying forcibly to apply to East Asiatic coun- ment on November 30 to the effect that the United 
tties fantastic principles and rules not adapted to the States, Britain, China and the Netherlands Indies 


actual situation in the world and thereby tending to were “collaborating fully in preparation for any 

















eventuality” left scant grounds to warrant any such 
Japanese hope. There is every indication that the 
Western powers, through military conversations dur- 
ing the past year, have laid the groundwork for a 
concerted defense against Japanese moves in Malaya, 
Burma, the Philippines, and the East Indies. Last- 
minute preparations, including the withdrawal of 
American marines from China, have been made. 
New military units have reached Singapore, while 
British “naval reinforcements” have been sent to the 
Far East, according to a statement of November 30 
by A. V. Alexander, First Lord of the Admiralty. 

Much may depend on how rapidly the British- 
American-Dutch forces are able to swing into action 
and how aggressively they are handled. If the Jap- 
anese army invades Thailand, and no immediate aid 
is rendered the Thai forces, Japan may gain a con- 
siderable initial advantage. Its progress will be much 
slower if, on the contrary, British planes from 
Malaya and Burma are quickly sent to Thailand's 
defending armies and if British troops and mechani- 
cal equipment follow as soon as possible. 

Even more will depend on the general course of 
the naval and air operations in the southern waters. 
It may be assumed that the combined British- 
American-Dutch air fleet in Southeast Asia will be 


superior in quality, and possibly even in numbers, to 


LIBYAN CAMPAIGN MAY LEAD TO SECOND FRONT 


For virtually the first time since the second World 
War began, two substantial offensives against the 
Axis are under way on two different fronts. In Libya 
the Eighth British Army, under General Sir Alan 
Cunningham, is beginning the third week of its 
drive to the west. Contact with the beleaguered gar- 
rison of Tobruk was made on November 27, and 
two days later British mechanized patrols reached 
the Gulf of Sidra below Benghazi, thereby threaten- 
ing Axis communications along the Mediterranean 
coast. Meanwhile the Russian army seemed to have 
taken the initiative both in the Moscow and Black 
Sea sectors. In the latter area, the Nazis were forced 
on November 29 to yield Rostov, strategic gateway 
to the Caucasus and the lower Volga, and to retreat 
westward. 

While the military situation in Libya is still con- 
fused, there is reason to believe that the British are 


ao 






Regular Membership .......ccccvccccrsenessmenen $ 

Associate Membership .....:ccccccccccseesesnesnsnnees $3 

Special Subscription to Headline Books 
| EE ae $2 


An attractive Christmas card will announce your gift. 


=> ~~ 


© 





Page Two 








——— 


the air forces which Japan can spare for its southem 
operations. Against enemy air superiority, Japan 
would hesitate to send its capital ships into this t. 
gion, while its lighter vessels might prove unable tp 
keep the necessary troop and supply transports moy. 
ing into Saigon and Haiphong. If Japan’s lines of 
sea communication with Indo-China were disrupted 
by air, surface or underwater attack, the French oo). 
ony might soon become a beleaguered fortress, with 
the Japanese forces holding a position analogous ty 
the Nazi divisions in Libya. 

The broader operations which such a conflict might 
entail can hardly be foreseen, but there is little douly 
as to the ultimate outcome. Japan would at one 
begin to draw heavily on its reserve stocks of wa 
materials, more particularly if it were also engaged 
in war with the mechanized divisions of the Sovie 
Far Eastern Army. A two-front naval and land war. 
fare of this scope might well exhaust its stocks of 
oil and munitions within six months. Shortages of 
raw materials and of man power would drastically 
reduce industrial production, which has already been 
declining for upwards of a year. Bombings of it 
vulnerable industrial centers would take an addi 
tional toll. Considerations of this nature may ye 
stay Japan’s hand, as it pauses before a fateful choice 


T. A. Bisson 


rapidly exploiting the initial advantage of the break. 
through of November 18. The main battle between 
powerful, highly mobile forces is joined in the 
“hump” of northern Cyrenaica, where the British 
are trying to push the Axis units toward the Medi: 
terranean, while cutting them up in Blitzkrieg fash- 
ion. The long thrust to the Gulf of Sidra, if fol 
lowed by heavy reinforcements, can seriously impait 
Axis transport and endanger the rear of German and 
Italian units fighting in the “hump.” 





ALLIED ADVANTAGES. Allied success in the| I 


Libyan campaign may be ascribed to several factors.| 
Since the low point of Allied strength in the Medi- 
terranean—following the Battle of Crete—both men 
and matériel in huge quantities have been rushed to 
the principal bases in Egypt from the British Isles 
the United States, and the British dominions and 
colonies in the Indian Ocean. Although the prob 
lems of transportation were great, the Allies have 
apparently accumulated sufficient supplies to hazari 
a major offensive. First-line planes delivered to the 
Middle East in considerable numbers enabled the 
R.A.F. to support ground units, protect them agains 
aerial attack, and disrupt the enemy's supply lines 
by bombing Italian ports and Libyan docks and 
roads. During the early part of the offensive, tht 
British were virtually undisputed in the air; in tht 











— 


first Si 
the Al 
ynits 
redres: 
The 
specta 
The fi 
coast | 
suppli 
with t 
forces 
of me 
paign 
cent C 
fore 
Navy 
man f 
ties O 
the ot 
agere 
only ¢ 
contre 


Wi! 
Libya 
ston 
much 
struct 
aim 1 
Medi: 
imprc 
are al 
militz 
Actio 
the e 
the r 
secon 
Afric 


[ few | 


Nazi 
much 
n tl 
Euro} 
mate’ 
ably 

Italia 
Allie 
still | 
Yuge 
possi 
conti 
cong 
arout 


FORE! 
Headqu 
Entere< 


> 





etn 
pan 
Te. 
C to 
10y- 
$ of 


Col. 
vith 
S to 


ight 
yubt 
ynice 
wat 
ged 
Viet 
Wat- 
3 of 
; of 
ally 


its 
ddi. 

yet 
ICE. 


eak. 
7een 
the 
itish 
edi- 
ash- 
fol- 
pait 


and 


the 
rors. 
edi- 
men 
d to 
sles, 
and 
rob- 
rave 
zatd 
the 
the 
Linst 
ines 
and 
the 
the 








—_—— 
— 





frst six days, 120 Axis planes were destroyed while 
the Allies lost 51. Since then, however, German air 
ynits have been rushed from the Continent to 
redress the balance. 

The support given by the British Navy is less 
spectacular but at least as effective in the long run. 
The fleet has bombarded Axis positions along the 
coast and guarded the transport ships which carry 
supplies to the army. It has also interfered seriously 
with the “Libyan Ferry” route, on which the Axis 
forces in Africa depend entirely for reinforcements 
of men, machines, and supplies. Before the cam- 

ign opened, the Admiralty claimed that 40 per 
cent of Italian shipping was sunk or damaged be- 
fore reaching Libyan ports. Now, however, the 
Navy must contend with increased numbers of Ger- 
man planes and submarines. If the manifold activi- 
ties of the Navy can be coordinated with those of 
the other Allied fighting and supply services into an 
aggressive, well-organized force, the British may not 
only clear the Axis from Africa but threaten Hitler’s 
control of Europe as well. 


WIDESPREAD RESULTS. The objective of the 
Libyan offensive, according to Prime Minister Win- 
ston Churchill’s speech of November 20, is not so 
much the occupation of territory as it is ‘the de- 
struction of the army . . . of the enemy.’ Once that 
aim is achieved, the position of the Allies in the 
Mediterranean and throughout the world would be 
improved. In fact, reactions favorable to the Allies 
are already perceptible in diplomatic discussions and 
military movements in widely separated quarters. 
Action in Africa serves to lift the hearts and stir 
the efforts of the British people. It tends to answer 
the requests of the Russians for the creation of a 
second front. Although the new British offensive in 
Africa has led the German High Command to move 
few except air units from the Russian front, the 
Nazi position in the Mediterranean would become 
much more serious if the Allies triumph in Libya. 
In that event, the entire southern coast of Axis 
Europe would be open to Allied air attacks and ulti- 
mately to Allied landing parties. Italy would prob- 
ably be singled out for special attention, since the 
Italian people are known to be weary of war. The 
Allies might attempt to make contact with the Serbs, 
still engaged in guerrilla warfare with the Axis in 
Yugoslavia, and join with the Greeks. It is not im- 
possible that an Allied offensive on the European 
continent could then be started. In any case, the 
conquest of Libya would strengthen the Allied ring 
around Europe and remove the menace of German 


Page Three 











F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: JAPAN S HOUR OF DECISION 
Guest Speaker: Robert W. Barnett 
Date; Sunday, December 7 
Time; 12-12:15 p.m., E.S.T., over NBC 

For station, please consult your local newspaper 











moves toward the Suez Canal or the ports of French 
West Africa. 

Developments in the Libyan campaign undoubt- 
edly influenced the attitude of Marshal Pétain when, 
accompanied by Admiral Jean Darlan, he met Reichs- 
marshal Goering on December 1 at Saint-Florentin. 
Presumably the Nazis are pressing Vichy for the 
use of French North African ports and air fields, 
and perhaps for the employment of the French 
Fleet, in order to stem the British advance. Indica- 
tions of a British victory might prompt the Marshal 
to resist these demands. The British successes will 
also condition the policy of the Turkish government, 
which may soon receive renewed German demands for 
the passage of troops and suppliesby water through the 
Dardanelles and by land across Anatolia to attack the 
Caucasus in the rear. Most important of all, a British 
victory in Libya would raise the hopes of millions 
in the conquered territories, as well as in the powers 
lined up against Hitler, for a victory in the near fu- 
ture. If the offensive fails, years may elapse before 
the Allies have a similar opportunity to challenge the 


Nazis’ hold on Europe. = y oins B FRECHTLING 





A Thousand Shall Fall, by Hans Habe. New York, Har- 
court, Brace and Company, 1941. $3.00 
A foreign volunteer in the French Army gives a graphic 
and poignant account of his war experiences which throws 
a revealing light on the reasons for the tragic collapse 
of French resistance. 


The Development of Hispanic America, by A. Curtis Wil- 
gus. New York, Farrar & Rinehart, 1941. $6.50 


One of the best general textbooks in Latin American his- 
tory, with emphasis on the modern period. The book is care- 
fully organized and helpfully illustrated. The author treats 
his subject both by topics and by countries, and includes 
useful bibliographical references after each chapter and at 
the end of the book. 


Behind the Rising Sun, by James R. Young. New York, 
Doubleday, Doran, 1941. $3.00 


“Jimmy” Young prefaces the story of his 61-day im- 
prisonment in Tokyo with a witty and revealing account 
of Japanese ways drawn from thirteen years of business 
and newspaper experiences in Japan. 


Pattern of Conquest, by Joseph Harsch. New York, 
Doubleday Doran, 1941. $2.50 
Valuable analysis of Nazi plans for a “new order,” by 
the former Christian Science Monitor correspondent in 
Berlin. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 7, DrcemMBER 5, 1941. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Ss 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicuHeres Dean, Editor. 
1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


National 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





. oe 


Washington News Letter |: 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 

National Press Building 

Dec. 1.—The Far Eastern negotiations entered a 
decisive phase this week as President Roosevelt re- 
turned to Washington from Warm Springs to deal 
personally with the critical issue of war or peace in 
the Pacific. During the preceding fortnight the talks 
had passed through two well-defined stages, the first 
limited to a preliminary exchange of views between 
the United States and Japan, the second involving a 
wider discussion between the American government 
and Britain, Australia, The Netherlands and China. 


FIRST STAGE, NOV. 17-21. Exactly what trans- 
pired during the initial exchanges was still largely 
a matter of conjecture, as complete secrecy shrouded 
all of the talks between President Roosevelt, Secre- 
tary Hull and the two Japanese envoys, Saburo 
Kurusu and Ambassador Nomura. On the basis of 
subsequent developments, however, Washington ob- 
servers were convinced that no progress had been 
made toward a permanent settlement and that the 
two governments were as far apart on fundamental 
principles as they were when negotiations first began 
nearly six months ago. 

Throughout the talks with the Japanese, Mr. Hull 
continued to adhere to the four basic conditions 
which the United States regards as essential to any 
lasting settlement of Pacific problems. These condi- 
tions were understood to include the following 
points: (1) withdrawal of Japan from the Axis, 
(2) renunciation of further aggression by Japan, 
(3) withdrawal of all Japanese armed forces from 
China and Indo-China, and (4) acceptance of the 
principle of non-discrimination in trade and equal 
commercial opportunity for all nations throughout 
the Pacific area. 

Mr. Kurusu was unable to accept any such broad 
commitments, and apparently added little to what 
Ambassador Nomura had already told the State De- 
partment. Nevertheless, it was evident that the 
Japanese negotiators hoped to postpone a final show- 
down by holding out the prospect of further “‘con- 
cessions’” to the United States as part of a limited 
settlement. The extent of these concessions was not 
revealed, but in some diplomatic quarters it was said 
that Japan was prepared to renounce any military 
move in Southeast Asia or Siberia, and to begin 
gradual withdrawal of troops from both China and 
Indo-China in return for gradual relaxation of 
American embargoes on oil and other essential ma- 


posals which did not nullify his basic principles 
when the Japanese envoys gave their answer to 
four basic conditions at a meeting held in the See 
retary’s hotel apartment on the night of November 
20, the prospect for even a limited accord had yjr. 
tually disappeared. 


terials. Mr. Hull was willing to listen to any nm 


SECOND STAGE, NOV. 22-29. The key to the 
second stage of negotiations, involving Britain, 
Australia, The Netherlands and China, was the re. 
ceipt of official information that Japanese reinforce. 
ments were being sent into Indo-China for a possible 
attack on Thailand. Washington correspondents 
were not informed of this development, however, 
until November 27, after the four powers had held 
several lengthy conversations which revealed an ap. 
parent tendency to consider a last-minute “truce” 
formula. The fact that the Chinese Ambassador, Dr, 
Hu Shih, had not been present at the beginning of 
the first meeting of the other Pacific powers, 
strengthened the suspicion that proposals for a lim 
ited agreement had been revived. Whether or not 
this suspicion was justified, Washington corte 
spondents interpreted the visit of the Chinese Am- 
bassador and Dr. T. V. Soong to the White House 
on November 26 as a vigorous protest against any 
settlement detrimental to China, and linked this visit 
with reports that Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek had 
sent a personal message to President Roosevelt. 


The decisive turn in the negotiations followed 
within a few hours of the Chinese Ambassador's call 
at the White House, but it also coincided with the 
release of news describing the Japanese troop com 
centrations in Indo-China. On the afternoon of No- 
vember 26 Mr. Hull handed the Japanese Ambasse- 
dor a formal document reaffirming the original 
American position, and the following morning 
President Roosevelt called the two Japanese envoys 
to the White House, presumably to express the con- 
cern of the United States over the military develop- 
ments in Southeast Asia. While the discussions may 
continue for a time, with the Japanese evidently 
anxious to stave off a final breakdown, there is noth- 
ing to warrant the conclusion that Washington will 
retreat from the firm stand it has adopted. The State 
Department still holds in reserve a statement for the 
record, which may be shortly published, giving the 
formal details of the conditions submitted to the 
Japanese government. 


WILLIAM T. STONE 








m 
su 
gotiat: 
Japan 
tages 

of th 
Hawa 
attack 


wars 

declar 
order: 
sued ; 
vessel 
Hono 
appoi 
evide 
negot 
ment 
its be 


TI 
has 
else « 
effec 
Euro 
has | 
the | 
was 
One 
vessi 
ousl 
side 
of 
com 
land 
in tl 
wer 
ane: 


bor 








