


=e: 


cl 





BS Sa23 


yut 
lis- 
ed 
he 
ed 


Gena, JAN 1 8 1946 
ora Lidrany Entered as 2nd class matter 
Univan. 4 
~ Veeuy of } 
*sChizan 
ws San 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 13 


JANUARY 11, 1946 


HIROHITO’S DENIAL OF DIVINITY REVEALS FERMENT IN JAPAN 





[" has become evident from recent developments 
that, within five months of its defeat by the Al- 
lied powers, Imperial Japan is in a state of political 
ferment far exceeding that to be found in Germany 
after a longer period of occupation. Although there 
isno reason for complacency concerning Japan's evo- 
lution as a peaceful state, the Emperor’s New Year's 
rescript informing the Japanese people that his 
claims to divinity are, after all, “legends and myths” 
reflects the growing popular disquiet within the 
country, as well as the pressure of American occupa- 
tion policy on the Japanese state. Something of the 
character of this policy has been revealed anew by 
General MacArthur's report on American activities 
in Japan and Korea during September and October, 
as released by the War Department on January 2, 
and especially by his directives of January 4, order- 
ing the Japanese government to abolish twenty- 
seven militaristic societies and to remove from office 





| and bar from the forthcoming general elections vari- 


ous categories of “active exponents” of militaristic 
nationalism ~ 


HAS HIROHITO BECOME A LIBERAL? The 
Imperial rescript, abandoning “the false conception 
that the Emperor is divine and that the Japanese 
people are superior to other races and fated to rule 
the world,” undermines more effectively than any- 
thing we could say the myths that have been used 
to drive the Japanese people to war. But this state- 
ment, however welcome, does not in itself destroy 
the basis for a future revival of militarism, nor 
is it a proof of liberalism and democratic views 
on the part of the Emperor. Many nations have en- 
gaged in aggressive warfare, although not regarding 
their rulers as divine; and the Japanese, should they 
again have an opportunity for aggression, may seize 
it even if in the meantime they have adopted a more 
modern and rational political organization than in 





the past. What the Emperor has done is to renounce 
the philosophy of Japanese militarism as hitherto 
constituted, in the hope of retaining his supreme 
position in Japanese life under another form. 


The Emperor's move was shrewd and far-seeing, 
involving a strikingly rapid adjustment to political 
necessity. On December 15 General MacArthur had 
ordered the removal of all state support for the na- 
tionalistic Shinto religion, which had been artificially 
encouraged by the Japanese government as part of 
its plans for aggression on the Asiatic mainland and 
in the Pacific. Since this directive made it probable 
that in the months ahead the foundations of divine 
tule would be weakened, the prospect arose that the 
Emperor might even find it necessary to abdicate. In 
recent weeks, also, the cabinet of Premier Kijuro 
Shidehara has been under increasing fire from the 
Japanese press and other agencies of public opinion 
because of its failure to tackle energetically the seri- 
ous problems of food, fuel and shelter. This, too, 
has represented a threat to the Imperial position, for 
under current conditions an unpopular cabinet in- 
evitably reflects on the Emperor—as well as on the 
American authorities. 


MOTIVES FOR THE RESCRIPT. It is in the 
light of these circumstances that the content of the 
Imperial rescript should be judged. The statement 
begins with a reiteration of the Charter Oath issued 
in 1868 by the Emperor Meiji—apparently in an 
effort to suggest that Hirohito, like his grandfather, 
intends to strike out boldly along new lines. Al- 
though the language of Meiji’s Charter Oath refers 
vaguely and reassuringly to the government’s acting 
in accordance with public opinion, it is noteworthy 
that its third clause—quoted in full by Hirohito 
along with the rest of the document—reads as fol- 
lows: “All common people, no less than the civil and 
military officials, shall be allowed to fulfill their just 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 





' 
. 
. 

















desires so that there may not be any discontent 
among them.” This is a startling clause to reaffirm 
at present, for the Emperor must know that, under 
occupation policy, Japan is not to have any “military 
officials” and the problem of allowing them to “ful- 
fill their just desires” therefore cannot arise. 

Perhaps the motivation behind the entire state- 
ment is to be found in these words: “We feel deeply 
concerned to note that consequent upon the protract- 
ed war ending in our defeat our people are liable to 
grow restless and to fall into the slough of despond. 
Radical tendencies in excess are gradually spreading 
and the sense of morality tends to lose its hold on 
the people with the result that there are signs of 
confusion of thoughts.” This section, taken in con- 
junction with the renunciation of divinity, suggests 
that the purpose of the rescript is to reduce the “rest- 
lessness’” among the people and to encourage the 
belief in America and Japan that the Emperor is 
capable of leading a progressive Japanese state. 

The immediate effect of the rescript is a whole- 
some one, especially since it has been followed so 
closely by General MacArthur's directive against 
office-holding by militaristic individuals—an order 
which has thrown the Japanese cabinet into a state 
of crisis and has seriously weakened the ultra-con- 
servative elements that dominate the government. 
This is especially true with regard to the Diet elec- 
tions which were planned for January 24, but are 
now to be postponed. Under the new directive the 
reactionary and misnamed Progressive party, which 
had hoped to sweep the balloting, will face grave 
difficulties, since so many of its high figures are 
barred from office as a result of their past militaristic 
activities. 

WHEN TO HOLD ELECTIONS. The fact that 
elections are being postponed offers an opportunity 
to consider whether voting for the Diet is desirable 
in Japan in the near future. The holding of early 
elections in a defeated enemy country, like Japan or 
Germany, should not be viewed as an obligation on 


Page Two —. 











the occupying authorities, but rather as a matter of 
tactics. Whether the first national balloting is 
take place in March, August or December ought tp 
depend on the strength that anti-militaristi¢ groups 
are likely to show at any particular time. Sing 
Japan's surrender there has been an encouragi 
growth of such groups, but they are still small and 
weak in relation to parties primarily representi 
aspects of Japanese life outmoded by defeat. It would 
clearly be undesirable to allow Japan’s fledgling anti. 
militarists to be forced into competition on a na 
tional scale with the camouflaged warhawks of the 
old order so soon after Japan’s defeat. Much bet. 
ter results might be achieved if Diet elections were 
postponed for six months or a year to permit the 
forward-looking elements in Japan to develop more 
strength. At the same time, the holding of contests 
on a local or prefectural basis might have useful 
educational effects and also give the makers of policy 
some means of judging when the time will be ripe 
for Diet elections. 

It is clear that, under American occupation, there 
has been a healthy growth of a new type of popular 
opinion in Japan. But it would be unwise to jump to 
the conclusion that Japan’s future development has 
been settled and will present no serious problems. 
The most fundamental issues of Japanese agricul- 
ture, labor and industry, although discussed in 
American directives, have barely been touched upon 
in practice. Genuine change in Japanese society will 
inevitably take a long time, and the enunciation of 
policy plans should not be confused with their actual 
execution. Moreover, as General MacArthur's report 
on his administration indicates, the economic prob- 
lems facing Japan are extremely serious. If Amer. 
icans were to think of Japan solely in political terms, 


plac 
Pol: 
has 
and 
Eur 
hov 





we would be in danger of overlooking the crucial 
effect that food, housing, fuel, land and wage poli 
cies will have on the political development of the 
defeated enemy in Asia. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


WILL PALESTINE INQUIRY OFFER NEW HOPE TO EUROPEAN JEWRY? 


On January 2 General Sir Frederick E. Morgan, 
director of UNRRA’s aid to displaced persons 
in Germany, declared that Polish Jews—many of 
whom, he claimed, were well fed, well clothed and 
supplied with plenty of money—were streaming into 
the American zone in a “well organized, positive 
plan to get out of Europe,” and this movement, in 
his opinion, was closely linked with the problem of 
Palestine. While it was soon clear that Sir Frederick's 
remarks had been misinterpreted by the press, his 
statement raised a storm of protest, especially among 
Zionist groups. UNRRA summarily dismissed him, 
but by January 7 his status was still unclear. 

The Morgan interview has also touched off discus- 
sions beyond the work of UNRRA. For it highlights 


the inquiry to be undertaken by the joint Anglo 
American Commission on Palestine, created on No- 
vember 13, and charged with making recommenda- 
tions about the future of European Jewry as well as 
Palestine. Its first hearings opened in Washington 
on January 7. The personnel of the new group, ai- 
nounced on December 10, includes Judge Joseph C. 
Hutcheson, of Texas, who will act as the alternate 
chairman with Sir John E. Singleton, Judge of the 
High Court of Justice in London. Among the Amer 
ican members of the Commission, Mr. James G. 
McDonald, former Chairman of the Foreign Policy 
Association, is perhaps the best known in this field 
because of his work as High Commissioner for Reft- 
gees under the League of Nations and as Chairmai 


will 
que 
car 
} 
pre 
| ma 
| yea 
| dor 
or 
oft 
i 





pre 
ha 


the 
Eu 
th 


FOI 
Hea 
secc 
one 








er of 
iS to 


Since 
ging 
| and 
ting 
ould 


L Na 
E the 


were 
t the 
more 
tests 
seful 


ripe 








mer- 


field 
‘efu- 











—— 





— 


of the President’s Advisory Committee on Political 
Refugees. 

FATE OF EUROPE’S JEWRY. By a tragic para- 
dox the problem of Europe’s Jewry has been growing 
more rather than less acute since the end of the war. 
By now it is clearly established that of Europe's 
former six or seven million Jews, only about one 
and a half or two million remain alive. Opinion is 
divided, however, concerning the fate of the Jews 
who survived the Nazi terror of the last decade or 
more. There are other statements, similar to that of 
General Morgan, on record indicating that the re- 

rts of outbreaks against Jews in Poland are exag- 
gerated. Yet the bulk of evidence since V-E Day 
shows that many Jews have suffered anew from anti- 
Semitic attacks as well as from the general chaos 
that has come in the wake of war. The proportions 
of the new anti-Semitic attacks, however, have never 
been accurately gauged, and hence never accurately 
presented to the American public. 

Violence toward Jewish populations has been re- 

rted in recent months not only from Poland, but 
even from Czechoslovakia and France. The earlier 
statement prepared by Earl G. Harrison, former 
United States Commissioner of Immigration, on 
which President Truman based his plea of August 31 
to Prime Minister Attlee for opening Palestine to 
100,000 additional European Jews, told part of the 
story of maltreatment within Germany. At the same 
time it must be borne in mind that the influx of dis- 
placed persons from areas of Germany occupied by 
Poland and Russia, as well as from Czechoslovakia, 
has created extremely grave problems for Britain 
and the United States. Whether all the Jews left in 
Europe wish to find refuge abroad or in Palestine, 
however, remains an open question. Difficult as it 
will be to ascertain, the long over-due answer to this 
question may be provided by the new Anglo-Amer- 


| ican Commission. 


NEW COMMISSION ON PALESTINE. The 
present urgent concern about General Morgan’s re- 
marks is wholly understandable in view of the long 
years in which little was attempted and nothing was 
done either about the plight of Hitler’s first victims 
or about Palestine. Commissions of inquiry have 
often been superimposed one on another; yet the 
present Commission has one advantage over its 
predecessors. While the United States and Britain 
have worked together before in search of answers to 
the problem of finding refuge for Jews driven from 
Europe, never have these two powers associated 
themselves officially in such an auspicious effort to 


Page Three 








study Europe’s Jewry in its relation to Palestine. 

What is surprising, in view of America’s direct 
official participation in the present effort to solve the 
long-standing Palestinian question, is the lack of 
support the Commission has received from some or- 
ganized Zionist groups. Charging that the new body 
is just another study group, they have protested that 
the United States has been led astray by Britain in 
accepting Attlee’s invitation for a joint investigation. 
The new Commission may, however, prove to be a 
fresh start toward adjusting the Palestine problem. 
Such a start was imperative, for in Palestine as well 
as in Europe the fate of Jewry hangs in the balance. 
During the past year sporadic violence has persisted 
in the mandated territory. Most evidence now points 
toward increasing disturbances, for certain of the 
extremist Zionist groups in Palestine are especially 
aroused by the new Commission's efforts. 


EFFECTIVE PROPOSALS NEEDED. Although 
the fresh attempt to settle the Palestine issue is wel- 
come, its recommendations will mean little, even if 
progressive and reasonable, until they are imple- 
mented. In view of its wide powers of recommenda- 
tion, it may be hoped the Commission will even sug- 
gest that quotas be raised to care for refugees who 
find it necessary to emigrate to British territories or 
the United States. This proposal is often derided by 
those most seriously concerned with solving the 
refugee problem. Yet it would relieve Britain and 
the United States—now that the latter is also directly 
involved in proposing solutions about Palestine—of 
the charge of hypocrisy. For Arabs oppose further 
immigration of Jews to Palestine as long as other 
states refuse to welcome them. 


A guarantee from the United States as well as 
Britain that a new status for Palestine will be estab- 
lished and upheld remains the crucial test of the new 
Commission’s courage and foresight. The Commis- 
sion’s recommendations, to be useful, must be far- 
reaching, but if they are broad in scope they will 
require considerable change in United States policy 
in the Near East. For this reason there is little room 
for special pleading that does not recognize that 
many conflicting interests besides those of Jews and 
Arabs center in Palestine. The new Commission 
will perform a valuable service if it provides a body 
of factual information and plans on which the public 
may base its conclusions about the needs of European 
Jewry and about plans for Palestine which both 
Britain and the United States can and will fulfill. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 13, JANuARY 11, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lest, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dgan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Se 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 














Washington News Letter 




















WASHINGTON HOPEFUL ON OUTLOOK FOR PEACE IN CHINA 


The success of the UNO in keeping the peace of 
the world will depend partly on whether China’s 
rival political factions can compose their differences 
and unite their country. China is a region where long- 
standing internal weakness has tempted strong for- 
eign governments to seek special preferment, thus 
inspiring strife and rivalry outside as well as inside 
the country. To allay international rivalry, the United 
States three times in 50 years has suggested moves 
to equalize the interests of all in China — first, 
through the doctrine of the Open Door (1899); 
second, through the Nine-Power Treaty (1922) ; and 
third, through the December 27 communiqué is- 
sued by the United States, Russia and Britain after 
the Moscow Conference, which recorded their joint 
wish for Chinese unification. The delegations which 
convene in London on January 10 for the first meet- 
ing of the General Assembly of UNO will there- 
fore have a deep interest in the formal conversations 
that began in Chungking on January 7, as a result of 
President Truman’s announcement of December 15 
and the Moscow communiqué. 


UNITY PROSPECTS IMPROVE. The prospects 
for domestic peace and unity are considered here 
better than at any time since Generalissimo Chiang 
Kai-shek first broke with the Chinese Communists in 
1927. The January 7 conference has brought together 
representatives of the two groups that are fighting 
a desultory civil war in China—the National govern- 
ment and the Communists—with General George C. 
Marshall, special envoy of President Truman. Gen- 
eral Chang Chun, provincial governor of Szechwan, 
represented Chiang, and General Chou En-lai repre- 
sented the Communists. 


Aside from the question of whether the Kuomin- 
tang and the Communists, so long at odds with each 
other, can combine forces on a common political ba- 
sis, the immediate issue that divides the two factions is 
which shall make the first concession. The Com- 
munists have asked for a general cessation of hostil- 
ities as a preliminary to any move toward unity. The 
government has proposed that the cessation be ac- 
companied by immediate restoration of railway com- 
munications. Until unity is an actual accomplishment, 
the Communists are afraid to support any truce that 
might endanger the position of their army, and open- 
ing of the railroads would make it possible for Na- 
tional forces to move unhindered into Communist- 
garrisoned areas unless specific guarantees were given 
the latter. 


While the Moscow communiqué acknowledged 
the “need for a unified and democratic China,” the 
United States still gives its main support to the Na. 
tional government. This is indicated by the continu. 
ing assistance Chiang Kai-shek receives from United 
States military forces. The Russians have agreed to 
keep their forces in Manchuria until February | 
in order to hold positions of occupation until 
the Chinese can relieve them. The State Depart. 
ment on December 18 announced that Lt. General 
Albert Wedemeyer, commander of United States 
forces in China, was authorized to transport Na 
tional government troops not only to ports but to 
inland cities of Manchuria. Wedemeyer’s announce. 
ment on December 29 that he would need 4,000 
more United States troops in China to move Chinese 
forces into Manchuria was in keeping with United 
States policy, as he is considered the judge of his 
own needs in accomplishing the mission assigned to 
him. The advance of National government troops 
into Jehol province at the end of December, how. 
ever, darkened the outlook for unification. On Jan- 
uary 3 the Communists, who claim their troops op- 
erated in Jehol during the war with Japan, protested 
the presence of national forces in that province. 

The support by the United States of the Na 
tional government’s interests is shown also in the 
assignment of United States Marines to guard the 
rail line from Tientsin to Chinwengtao, as well as 
the Kailan Mining Administration along the line. 


But the National government has been made to re | 
alize that it cannot get unlimited aid from the | 


United States for the pursuit of the civil war toa 
victorious end. The Moscow communiqué urged 
“broad participation by democratic elements in all 
branches of the national government and . . a cessa- 
tion of civil strife.” 


UNITY NOT ENOUGH. Since the United States 
has found it necessary to its own security to attempt 
to equalize foreign interests in China at intervals of 
less than twenty-five years, the Administration has 
begun the search for a sound program on which 4 


unified China could develop lasting economic and | 


political stability. Plans for industrialization, such 
as that proposed by the Foreign Economic Adminis- 
tration in 1944 at the request of Chiang Kai-shek, 
touch only part of the problem. China cannot be fully 
independent of dangerous unilateral foreign inter- 
vention until it is sturdy as well as united within. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


191 


S 
e 











