which 
id of 


g out 


sident 
crease 
| now 
ilable. 


with 


s been 
Jatory 
oduct. 
ike its 
ship 


try at 
1e iM: 
5 and 
upted 
ervers 
as we 
how: 
ravate 
ction. 


ping 
cleat 





ths yt AL ™ ea Un! 
per aL t BRA 
IRA “. 
gan’ oF mic Ann if 
gol’: enn Art 


Entered as 2nd class matter 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XX, No. 31 


May 28, 1941 





FRANCO-GERMAN COLLABORATION CREATES GRAVE ISSUES FOR U.S. 


ne the American public is debating ways 

and means of giving effective aid to Britain 
without risk of war, the United States is confronted 
with a Nazi peace offensive calculated to prevent 
further measures of American aid by a combination 
of threats and promises. This offensive, started si- 
multaneously on many fronts, includes such seem- 
ingly disconnected items as Rudolph Hess’ flight to 
Scotland; peace feelers in Tokyo; German references 
to Soviet aid for Iraq; hints to American business 
men that, in case of Nazi victory, Latin American 
trade will be shared by German-controlled Europe 
with the United States; and, most recent and most 
important of all, appeals by the Nazi-dominated 
press of occupied France for mediation by President 
Roosevelt. Each of these moves has been accom- 
panied by veiled or open threats that, if the United 
States does not use its good offices to stop war be- 
tween Britain and Germany (or between China and 
Japan), it will be faced with the concerted opposi- 
tion of Europe and Asia, organized into a “new 
order” under the aegis of the Axis powers. 

HESS’ PEACE MISSION. Whatever may be the 
final interpretation that historians will place on Hess’ 
flight, his object was apparently to establish a basis 
for peace negotiations between Britain and Ger- 
many. Whether he acted as he did because he feared 


| ultimate disaster for the Reich, or because he hoped 


to prevent closer Soviet-German collaboration; 
whether he was charged with this mission by Hitler, 
and is thus to be regarded as “Fifth Columnist” No. 1, 
or represented a Nazi group opposed to further mili- 
tary adventures—all these are secondary issues. Even 
if it can be demonstrated that Hess has broken with 
Hitler, it would be difficult to prove that his ideas 
about the future of Europe and the world are ba- 
sically different from those of the Fihrer. It seems 
probable that Hess hoped to win the support of 
those elements among British Tories who once 


favored the policy of “appeasement,” and who still 
believe that, if Nazism breaks down, peace can be 
made either with the German army or with German 
industrialists—possibly with a view to eventual joint 
attack on the Soviet Union. It should be added that, 
paradoxical as it may seem, peace with Germany is 
also favored by a small minority on the extreme Left. 
The blunt attack made on Hess by Ernest Bevin, 
Minister of Labor, on May 15 would indicate that 
anti-appeasement sections of British public opinion 
believe that an understanding between some British 
circles and the Nazi régime is by no means incredible. 
Even to suggest the possibility of disunity within 
Britain at this critical moment, when the decision to 
increase American aid still hangs in the balance, 
would be enough to justify Hess’ spectacular trip. 
GERMANY USES FRANCE AS SHIELD. It is 
significant that this trip followed close on an article 
in the Japan Times-Advertiser, organ of the Tokyo 
Foreign Office, on April 29, outlining the kind of 
“victors’” peace that the Axis powers would be 
ready to offer. It also coincided with Germany's ef- 
forts to consolidate its position on the continent in 
such a way as to create the impression in Britain and 
the United States that all hope of liberating Europe 
from Nazi rule must now be abandoned. On May 15 
Italy, after losing the campaigns of Albania, Libya 
and East Africa, was awarded control of Yugo- 
slavia’s Dalmatian coast, and of Croatia, trans- 
formed into a kingdom to be ruled by the Italian 
Duke of Spoleto, brother of the Duke of Aosta, who 
has been forced to surrender Ethiopia to Britain. 
Germany's most important diplomatic victory, 
however, is the success it has achieved in using 
France as a shield against the possibility of Ameri- 
can naval aid to Britain. The terms of collaboration 
discussed by Admiral Darlan with Hitler at Berch- 
tesgaden on May 11, and subsequently with Dr. 
Schacht, have not yet been revealed. In a radio ad- 


iA 
a 


a 
i | 
i +, 
ae 
ie 
ait 
l 
iid 
fit 
: 
‘iy 


—e 
a ae ans 


lage 


= ~ . ~ —— ~ as RE gs H e 
Baas Sei Rim ees =i TS ae etins ~-S_2 ec aaas 
fide Se SLES ge aS re ae iis lic 


a 














dress of May 15 Marshal Pétain declared that, 
through “close discipline’ and “public spirit” 
France would “surmount her defeat and preserve in 
the world her rank as a Euro and colonial 
people”; and admonished the French to follow him 
“without mental reservation along the path of honor 
and national interest.” When reports of Franco- 
German collaboration brought criticisms and expres- 
sions of alarm from Britain and the United States, 
the press of occupied France denounced American 
“intervention” in Europe and stated that, if this coun- 
try should enter the war, France would join Germany 
in a common European front. French threats, how- 
ever, gave way on May 18 to a plea for mediation 
by President Roosevelt, with the suggestion that 
the United States could virtually dictate peace terms 
to the Axis powers and Britain, and that France 
would use its influence to aid such a peace gesture. 
This policy of tying France’s fate to that of con- 
tinental Europe, and yet using France as a bridge- 
head between Europe and the New World, repre- 
sents the views held before the war by French ad- 
vocates of “continentalism” as opposed to universal- 
ism—among them the journalist Pierre Dominique, 
who on May 13 was appointed general director of 
the French Information Office, official French news 
agency in Vichy. 

The dilemma posed for the United States by this 
skillful Nazi peace offensive has many facets. To 


Page Two 








— 


Americans who, like Mr. Lindbergh and Senatg, 
Wheeler, have been urging abandonment of aid tp 
Britain and a “negotiated’’ peace, the French appeal, 
inspired from Berlin, offers an easy way of avoiding 
the risks of war—although it should be pointed oy 
that the Axis powers are talking not about a “nego. 
tiated” peace, but a ‘victors’ ’’ peace. For Americans 
who favor all-out aid to Britain, this French appeg| 
poses the cruel problem that, if the United States 
should enter the war, it would be fighting, first of 
all, not the Reich, but its own World War ally 
France, which has already suffered bitterly from the 
effects both of the war and of the armistice. The 
very indecisiveness of American public opinion 
(which may now be further divided by Nazi peace 
feelers) strengthens Nazi domination of Europe— 
since the delay between promises of American aid 
and their fulfillment gradually undermines the spirit 
of those, in France and elsewhere, who have not yet 
conceded Germany's victory. In this sense, prolonga. 
tion of the war, with no clear indication of what the 
United States intends to do (beyond the vague pro. 
posals of economic freedom made by Secretary Hull 
on May 18), may prove a real advantage for Ger. 
many, by robbing the conquered peoples of the hope 
that the Nazis’ “new order” may some day yield toa 


“newer order” inaugurated by Britain and the| 


United States. 
VERA MICHELES DEAN 


EVENTS IN SYRIA PRECIPITATE NEW CRISIS 


The diplomatic and military situation in the East- 
ern Mediterranean remained in a precarious balance 
last week. While hostilities spread to Syria, the 
Duke of Aosta, Viceroy of Italian East Africa, surren- 
dered on May 19 with his troops—7,000 Italians and 
31,000 colonials — at Alagi, the most important of 
the three Ethiopian towns under his command. The 
end of Aosta’s resistance, which had apparently been 
prolonged for many weeks in order to prevent the 
transfer of British Empire forces from Ethiopia to 
Egypt, completes the elimination of Axis control of 
the Red Sea approaches to the Suez Canal. With a 
virtual stalemate existing in Libya, where summer 
heat and supply difficulties have impeded both the 
Germans and British, the main threat to Britain’s po- 
sition at Suez and the Middle East therefore comes 





JUST PUBLISHED—A broad analysis of peace 
aims, outlining reconstruction proposals along 
social, political and economic lines. Read: 


TOWARD A NEW WORLD ORDER 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25¢ 


May 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 











from the northern prong of the Nazi pincer. 


THE NAZIS IN SYRIA. While Britain held sev- | 


eral key positions in Iraq—including Basra, major 
port on the Persian Gulf; the Habbania airfield, near 
Baghdad; and Rutba, on the oil pipeline to Haifa— 
and appeared to be overcoming Iraqi resistance, Ger 
man airplanes were reported on May 15 to be using 
Syrian airfields en route to assist the pro-Axis goy- 
ernment of Premier Rashid Ali Beg Gailani, who 
had seized power on April 4.* This cooperation be- 


tween Syria, a French mandate, and the Axis precipt | 


tated a new crisis in the strained relations of London 
and Vichy. In a radio broadcast from Beirut on 
May 18 General Henri Fernand Dentz, French High 
Commissioner for Syria and the Lebanon, charged 
that France was wrongly accused “of not having 
forcibly repelled German airplanes flying over Syria, 
some of which were forced to make landings,” and 
warned that he would resist British “aggression” and 
would “reply to force with force.” 


General Dentz is believed to have only 30,000 t0| 


50,000 men under his command, but Germany 6 
reported to be bringing in reinforcements by plane 
and ship—probably through the Straits with the 





*'‘Iraq Outbreak Weakens Britain in Middle East,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin 
May 9, 1941. 





conni 
the 4 
mant 
Brita: 
Pales 
Syria 
Medi 
Cypr 


confl 
Asia 
area, 
fuel 


enab 
the | 
ingly} 
ship] 
by ¥ 
East 
disas 
the * 
mor 
Brit: 
ing | 
ever 
rela 
Tur 


role 


Ma’ 


} mer 


a 





ove: 


Ital 
Wa 
wit 
else 
out 
key 
sen 
sid 
but 
lon 


for 
all: 


| to 


An 


» aft 





FOR 
Hea 
Ente 











—} ———— Page Three 

















Nato} connivance of Turkey—and rehabilitating some of ’ 

id to he airplanes and other equipment ocifieasiy dis- F.P.A. Radio Schedule 

peal,} mantled under the Italo-French armistice agreement. Subject: U.S. FACES SHOWDOWN WITH VICHY 

iding} Britain may not yet have sufficient forces in northern oR Goes 

1 out} Palestine and Trans-Jordan to strike effectively into Ste all be or 

1ego-| Syria, but its naval and air power in the Eastern Station: NBC, blue network 

icans} Mediterranean—based upon Alexandria, Crete and ; 
»peal | Cyprus—can hamper Axis communications. lieved to cover chiefly economic cooperation, they 


tates} TAKES IN NEAR EAST. The stakes in this vast may have included a demand for unrestricted use of 
St of | conflict throughout the Eastern Mediterranean and the Straits. Because Turkey is now virtually isolated 
ally, | Asia Minor are enormous. The oil fields in the Mosul and willing to act only if invaded, it will probably 
1 the} grea, while a valuable and convenient source of be by-passed by Germany's military machine, except 
The} fyel for Britain, would be of vital importance to Ger- possibly for transportation of supplies. Even more 


inion | many. Conquest of the Suez Canal would not only uncertain at the moment are Iran and Afghanistan, 
eat / enable the Axis to weaken Britain's blockade of two Moslem countries affiliated with Iraq and Tur- 
€— | the Continent and to cut the supply line—increas- key under a treaty of friendship and non-aggression 
aid | ingly useful because of the passage of American signed in 1937, and the Moslem areas of the 
spirit | shipping and war material through the Red Sea— Arabian peninsula—all of great strategic value in 
t yet} by which Britain has maintained its armies in the this conflict, as in the World War. While it is doubt- 
mga} Eastern Mediterranean, but it would also have a ful that the Mohammedan world, extending from 
t the | disastrous effect upon British prestige throughout North Africa to portions of India, will unite in a 
pfo- | the world. If the Axis were to triumph in this area, holy war’ against the British Empire, these popu- 
Hull} moreover, it would enjoy access to Iran, India and lations offer fertile ground for Axis propaganda. 
Get-} Britain’s colonies and spheres of influence border- ROLE OF THE U.S.S.R. Germany's ambitions 
hope ing the Indian Ocean. Several uncertain factors, how- southeast of the Straits clash, as in the nineteenth 
't0a! ever, condition an immediate German victory: the Century, with those of Russia, which traditionally has 
the | ‘relative strength of Britain’s forces, the position of sought an outlet to the sea—to the Mediterranean, 
Turkey, latent unrest of the Moslem world, and the the Persian Gulf, and the Indian Ocean. Wishing 
AN | sdle of the Soviet Union. to avoid a showdown with Germany either in Europe 


While Prime Minister Churchill declared on °F Asia Minor, the Soviet Union appears to be 
May 7 that General Wavell had almost 500,000 acquiescing—st least temporarily—in these, sevemt 
men under his command, not all of this army, spread Nazi thrusts. Moscow extended diplomatic recogni- 


‘| ers ag ru wll tied and well upped ton the ae, Baghdad pis on May 16 on 
J" The stalemate in Libya and Britain’s conquest of “~ f It j 27 ee nn Seal 
rh: Italian East Africa, however, have given General ne ro ae Pegpntscegs 6s ats i Se 

= . nion 
Ga Wavell an opportunity to reorganize the crack troops Anil thie aiake de Pa cat of the San id 
“| withdrawn from Greece and to prepare for action _ 8 


Mt Wiawhere: and it is doubtful whether the Axis. with- spheres of influence, as it was divided by Russia and 











ad out control of the sea or the full cooperation of Tur- Britain in previous decades. . G 

‘a key for railway transport, will soon be able to as- JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 

i” semble comparable forces in the Near East. Both A Hundred Years of the British Empire, by A. P. Newton. 

*CIPF | sides are operating far from their centers of supply, New York, Macmillan, 1940. $3.75 

ndon but the advantage will remain with the British so Cute reed ¢ te Rapive Ege the seein of 

° T resent war. 

oe long as they control both ends of the Mediterranean. Queen Victeren to Op Cra a 

a Germany’s drive to the East might be slowed down - ge? a, urope, by F. L. Schuman. New York, Knope, 

ving for . considerable period of time if Turkey—still Vivid interpretation and analysis of the catastrophic 

rig allied with Britain—were to resist actively or even happenings of 1939-40. 

eo to refuse passive cooperation with the Axis. Al- Housing for Defense. New York, Twentieth Century Fund, 

and | though the proposals which Franz von Papen, Nazi 1940. $1.50 

et | Ambassador to Turkey brought to Ankara Mav 12 The findings and recommendations of the Twentieth 
f /? ; y Century Fund’s housing survey should prove of vital in- 

0 to atter long consultations in Germany were be- terest to any one concerned about the defense program. 

y is 


sane FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XX, No. 31, May 23, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA MicHELES DEAN, Editor. 

the Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 

S181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


ulletin, 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 19.—Even the Hess affair was pushed into 
the background last week, as Washington measured 
the consequences of Vichy’s decision to collaborate 
with Hitler. Less than 48 hours after Marshal Pétain 
had delivered his message to the French people on 
May 15, it was evident in Washington that this fate- 
ful decision was opening a new chapter for the 
United States, as well as for Europe. 


WASHINGTON REPLIES TO VICHY—Presi- 
dent Roosevelt lost no time in voicing the grave con- 
cern of the American government. In a formal state- 
ment issued after consultation with Secretary of State 
Hull and Under Secretary Sumner Welles, the Presi- 
dent declared that “it is inconceivable” that the 
French people “will willingly accept any agreement 
for so-called ‘collaboration’ which will in reality 
imply their alliance with a military power whose 
central and fundamental policy calls for the utter 
destruction of freedom, liberty and popular institu- 
tions everywhere.” The President added, signifi- 
cantly, that any such arrangements “would appar- 
ently deliver up France and its colonial empire, in- 
cluding French African colonies and the Atlantic 
coast,” thus menacing the peace and safety of the 
Western Hemisphere. 


This statement, which was broadcast by short 
wave to France, was promptly followed by action. 
On the night of May 15 the Coast Guard placed un- 
der protective custody all the eleven French ships 
in American ports, including the liner Normandie. 
As though to drive home the meaning of this step, 
the Senate passed the Administration’s Ship-Seizure 
Bill the same day by a vote of 59 to 20, assuring the 
President full power to requisition all foreign-flag 
vessels needed for defense of the United States. 


Further warnings from Secretary Hull, Colonel 
Knox and other spokesmen left no doubt about the 
Administration’s chief source of concern—control of 
the high seas. For if the Vichy policy of collabora- 
tion should lead to Axis domination of North Africa, 
as it has already led to military domination of Syria, 
the gateway to Casablanca, Dakar and the Atlantic 
would be open to Hitler, and the contest for control 
of the seas would inevitably involve the United 
States. Without directly referring to Dakar, or 
French possessions in the Western Hemisphere, Mr. 
Hull declared in an address on May 18 that ‘‘control 


— 


of the seas is the paramount purpose of the Axjs 
powers in their program of world domination” 
Colonel Knox, speaking at the Naval War College 
two days earlier, asserted that new factors resulting 
from the Vichy accord placed this nation in “mort,| 
danger.” Mr. Roosevelt again underscored the vital 
importance of sea power at his press conference op 
May 16 when he challenged Germany's announced 
intention of blockading the Red Sea, and reminde; 
reporters that the United States had fought two up. 
declared wars (against the Barbary pirates in the 
Mediterranean and French privateers in the Carib 
bean) to uphold the doctrine of freedom of the seas. 


But despite rumors that the Navy is prepared tp 
occupy Martinique whenever the order is given, the 
Administration refrained from precipitate action, for 
the moment at least. The State Department, which 
had supported the policy of limited food shipments 
to France, still appeared reluctant to endorse an 
open break with Vichy until it was absolutely certain 
about General Weygand’s position in North Africa 
Before the latest negotiations with Hitler, reports 
from Admiral Leahy gave the State Department 
some reason to believe that General Weygand would 
resist Nazi occupation of the area under his control. 
Less than three weeks ago, on the strength of this| 
belief, it sent Robert Murphy, Counselor of the 
American Embassy at Vichy, on a special mission to 
North Africa. While Vichy’s earlier assurances and 
guarantees to Admiral Leahy must now appeu 
worthless in view of Nazi operations in Syria, the 
State Department is still awaiting a final report be 
fore accepting the alternative. 


No one in Washington doubts that the alternative 
will call for action more far-reaching than convoys. 
For if Vichy is regarded as a member of the Axis 
strategic necessity will become the controlling facto: 





in American policy. Dakar and Casablanca still seem 
remote even to most of the President’s supporters in| 
Congress. But strategic necessity and the Nazi chal | 
lenge for control of the Atlantic have already begut)| 
to force a significant shift in Congressional opinion, 
as demonstrated by the growing number of isolation 
ists who have urged the Administration to Occup}; 
Martinique and other French possessions in tht 
Western Hemisphere. The implications of this de 
velopment have not been overlooked by the Exect 
tive branch of the government. 


W. T. STONE 








welg 
tion 
and 


Am« 


yon 
disp 
the 

the 

rece 
to g 
tion 
now 


brea 
mat 
con 
leat 
Hit 
stru 
in t 
tim 
eral 


all 


Ove 


tin 
ad] 
of 

ma 


