


On * 


al. 
st 


he 
rd. 


ld - 


ur 


ize 


ns 


10t 


uil- 


ike 
aly 
nd 








ICAL. ROO 
geNERAL LIBRAR 


j/ —1944 
: guiy. oF 


JUN 12 1944 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michizan 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 34 


June 9, 1944 





INVASION SPEEDS PLANS FOR WORLD ORGANIZATION 


he beginning of the long-awaited Allied inva- 
sion of Western Europe on June 5, the day after 
occupation of Rome by Allied forces, should give 
new courage to the peoples of conquered Europe 
awaiting liberation from Nazi rule. It also brings 
urgent emphasis to current discussions of the 
international system that might replace Hitler’s “new 
order” in Europe. That these discussions are about 
to enter the stage of official negotiations among the 


| United Nations was indicated on May 30, when 


President Roosevelt said this country will place be- 
fore its allies a tentative project for a form of world 
organization, and Secretary of State Hull announced 


| he had invited the British, Russian and Chinese gov- 
| ermments, through their Ambassadors in Washing- 


ton, to open conversations on the basis of this pro- 
ject. Mr. Hull’s announcement was preceded by a 
series of meetings at which members of the Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee were afforded an op- 
portunity to discuss with the Secretary details of the 
post-war plans drafted by the State Department. 
WHO SHOULD REPRESENT WHOM? The 
initiative taken by the United States, if translated 
into concrete measures, may prove a milestone on 
the arduous road toward world order. But there is 


, } no lack of skeptics of various schools of thought who 


doubt the possibility of forming what Sumner Welles 
has called “‘a true world organization” until the war 
is over, and Europe has achieved a measure of stabil- 
ity. One argument frequently heard is that it is im- 
ptacticable, in this period of political confusion, to 


‘ determine what governments are entitled to repre- 





sent certain countries — notably France, Poland, 
Yugoslavia and Greece — on a political council of 
the United Nations, and that we must wait until 
these countries have acquired stable governments 
duly recognized by the great powers before such a 
council can be established. Meanwhile, it is con- 
tended, the great powers can act as benevolent trus- 


tees on behalf of the small nations. 

The weakness of this argument is its assumption 
that liberation will, of itself, bring about the estab- 
lishment in every one of the liberated countries of 
governments acceptable to the United States, Britain 
and Russia. If we are to wait until this happy event 
has taken place, then world organization can be rele- 
gated to the millenium. The war has precipitated a 
series of political explosions all over the world, 
which may have the effect of time-bombs in the post- 
war period. We might just as well face the fact that 
it will prove impossible, at any given moment of 
history, to achieve uniformity in the political institu- 
tions of unequally developed countries, and that the 
great powers will have to work with some govern- 
ments we—or the British, or the Russians—do not 
like, until conditions in their countries have made 
the establishment of other governments feasible. It 
must be hoped that the liberated countries, once they 
have recovered from the shock of war and terrorism, 
will be able to develop the kind of institutions and 
practices that would facilitate their col!2boration 
with the great powers, and that the latter, mean- 
while, will encourage freedom of choice by the 
people of each of these countries, But any attempt 
by the great powers to dictate the kind of govern- 
ment the small nations should have, or to bar their 
participation in an international organization until 
they have satisfied certain criteria, would merely con- 
firm the fear—voiced again on May 31 by Eelco Van 
Kleffens, Netherlands Foreign Minister—that the 
great powers intend to ignore the small nations in 
their plans for the post-war period. Mr. Hull sought 
to dispel this fear in his statement of June 1, when 
he said that this country's traditional championship 
of liberty should give assurance to the small nations 
that they will be treated as equals in the proposed 
world organization. 


ORDER PLUS FREEDOM. The small nations 





~ 
eee 
i RANG atl: se « 











are aware—more than ever now after their grueling 
experience under Nazi rule—that they will be unable 
to enjoy freedom unless there is some measure of 
order in Europe, and that order will depend on the 
extent to which the great powers can assure security 
against future aggression by any nation. The crucial 
_ of relations between nations—as of human 

ings within nations—is to reconcile order with 
freedom. It is becoming increasingly clear that Roose- 
velt, Churchill and Stalin, each naturally influenced 
by the particular interests of the country he heads, 
believe that post-war order can be best achieved if 
military force is retained by those who now possess it 
—the United States, Britain and Russia. It is, of 
course, true that one of the reasons for the failure 
of the League of Nations was that it had no military 
force at its disposal. It must also be recognized that 
it may be a long time before the various countries 
of the world will be ready to entrust control of their 
military forces to a world organization. The pattern 
apparently favored by President Roosevelt, and with 
some differences in emphasis also by Churchill, is an 
executive council composed of the great powers, 
which would direct the use of the military force at 
the command of each, but would perhaps be willing, 
when the time is deemed appropriate, to consult an 
assembly of small nations on matters of principle 
and policy. This pattern, it is said, is the only prac- 
ticable approach to the problem of security, since the 
great powers would be unwilling to have the small 
nations—rich in many values precious to civiliza- 
tion, but poor in the sinews of war—decide how the 
armed forces of the United States, Britain or Russia 
should be used in any given contingency. 

The difficulty with this argument, however, is that, 
once hostilities are over, considerations other than 
those of military power will gain the ascendancy as 
men resume peacetime tasks. It is by no means clear 
that at that stage the great powers will necessarily 
agree any more than the members of the League con- 
cerning the issues that lead to aggression, and thus 
to the use of military force, unless some permanent 
framework of collaboration in other spheres—poli- 


—— aceon =n Page Two 








— 
—— 


tical, economic, social—has meanwhile been estab. 
lished. The League of Nations failed, among other 
things, not because its individual members lacked 
power, actual or potential, but because they lacked 
the will to make use of their power for other than 
their own ends—and did not agree among them- 
selves as to the ends worth pursuing. 


Without such willingness and such agreement any 
world organization of the future, even if restricted 
to a great-power directorate, will prove as impotent 
as the League. A military coalition is a most impor- 
tant outward shell—but a shell nevertheless which 
must be judged by its content. If the three great 
powers should maintain their military coalition in 
the post-war period only to enforce their will on 
smaller and weaker nations, then liberation of 
Europe from Nazi rule will only open another chap- 
ter of conflict and revolt. If, on the other hand, they 
are willing to place their military power at the ser- 
vice of an international organization in which other 
nations are given an opportunity to participate—and 
to participate not at some date in the dim future to 
be fixed by the Big Three, but right now, while lib- 
eration is under way—then we may look forward to 
a period when all nations, great and small, can learn 
together the difficult, sometimes seemingly hopeless, 
art of working out their common problems. As Pres- 
ident Roosevelt has said: “Nations will learn to 
work together only by actually working together.” 
All arguments in favor of postponing cooperation to 
some date when things may seem easier or the por- 
tents for its success more propitious are only so many 
ways of rationalizing our unwillingness to pass from 


; 








— 


ity of 
Wash: 

Ca 
am 
abroac 
hassac 
omy < 
matte! 
dom. . 
sion. ¢ 
so fat 
cernec 
recon’ 
before 
Nor a 
by th 
States 


FR. 


, —inte 


| 


words to deeds. The peoples of Europe have proved | 


their hatred of Nazi dictatorship by resisting it under 
conditions of suffering we cannot even imagine. We 
must not only help to liberate them from the physical 
torture of Nazi rule. We must go further, and use 


military victory to liberate them—and ourselves— | 
| Cane 


from the spectre of another such catastrophe. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The third of three articles on United States policy in Europe.) 


CANADIANS WEIGH FUTURE COURSE IN WORLD AFFAIRS 


Premier Curtin of Australia, visiting Canada en 
route from the recent London Conference of the 
Dominion Prime Ministers, reiterated his belief in 
the necessity of closer unity among the five British 
nations in an address on June 1 to a joint assembly 
of the Houses of Parliament in Ottawa. Although 
the statement issued by the London Conference in- 
dicated that plans for the closer integration of the 
British Commonwealth have been temporarily dis- 
missed, the speech suggests that the issue is by no 
means wholly closed. The views of Mackenzie King, 
Canada’s Prime Minister, in opposition to the scheme 
unquestionably reflect the majority opinion in Can- 


ada; yet a debate on foreign policy is shortly due at 

Ottawa, where the questions which originally 

prompted the discussion will be re-examined. 
CANADA INDEPENDENT. Canada’s position 


in these discussions is due to the historical develop- | 
ment that has brought the country to an independent . 


Dominion status. But the war effort itself has em- 
phasized a new sense of prestige which Canada does 
not wish to relinquish. Canada ranks fourth among 
the United Nations in munitions production. Its sug: 
gestions for an international monetary agreement 
were submitted independently of Britain and the 
United States, and Canadians have served in a capac- 





| 


occup 
curret 
to thi 
ly of 
cific 2 
new-f 
also 

in 
tribut 
find 3 
est if 
south 
minic 
need 
great 
recog 
and 

labor 


deve 





RaFS| _ 





,Tpaam YY 


g- 


he 
MC- 








——— 
_o~7™ 





ity of equality on several of the Combined Boards in 
Washington which coordinate Allied economic poli- 

_ Canada’s new status is also reflected in the larger 
number of diplomatic representatives it has sent 
abroad, several of whom have been raised to am- 
bassadorial rank. Basically, however, Canada’s econ- 
omy depends on that of the United States and, in 
matters of trade, also on that of the United King- 
dom. Evidence of this is given in plans for reconver- 
sion. Canada’s reconversion, while simpler than ours 
so far as the number of industrial plants is con- 
cerned, is complicated by the need to await actual 
reconversion and re-equipment in the United States 
before similar measures can be adopted in Canada. 
Nor are Canadians unaware of the problems created 
by their geographic position, between the United 
States on the south and Russia on the north. 


FRAMING FOREIGN POLICY. It is these facts 


|—internal developments and the strategic position 


occupied by Canada—which explain the nature of its 
current proposals on foreign affairs. Canadians tend 
to think of their post-war policy in terms almost sole- 
ly of defense of the north Atlantic and north Pa- 
cific areas, respectively. This policy springs from the 
new-found sense of independent action and probably 
also from isolationist sentiment which persists 
in some areas. Although proud of their con- 
tribution in the present world-wide struggle, they 
find it difficult to perceive any future Canadian inter- 
est in such regions as the Middle East or even in the 
southwest Pacific, despite the fact that two sister Do- 
minions are located there. Canadians recognize the 


| need for a strong United Kingdom, but largely as a 


great air base off the European continent. They also 
recognize the ultimate strength of the United States, 
and have a consequent desire to continue the col- 
laboration with this country for mutual defense 


, developed during the present war. 


At the same time there is an evident inability in 


Canada to project into the post-war period what in 





essence are inter-Commonwealth or even world-wide 


Page Three 





What kind of peace with non-Nazi Germany? 
Should Allies establish military administration? 
Will Russia share in administration? Read: 
WHAT FUTURE FOR GERMANY? 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


FOREIGN Po icy Reports, Vol. XVIII, No. 22 
Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















commitments today. However much Canada may in- 
sist on retaining constitutional authority in any Com- 
monwealth development, it will be no less affected 
by future events within the Commonwealth than 
in the critical days of 1939. Certainly the reasons 
which gave rise to the Smuts-Halifax statement 
and the earlier Curtin proposals for centralization 
still remain. The London Conference did not meet 
Britain’s need for assured strength with respect to - 
other great powers. Since Canada desires a strong 
United Kingdom, it should have a natural concern 
in this matter. 


WORLD-WIDE COMMITMENTS. Yet Canada 
hesitates to make further commitments, although it 
is true that government officials are on record along 
with those of the other United Nations in favor of 
a post-war international organization. At present, it 
is felt, United Nations plans are very vague, and tend 
to suggest re-creation of a balance of power system 
which is contrary to Canada’s ideas. Yet Canada be- 
lieves the great powers must take the lead in estab- 
lishing an international security organization and 
would be prepared to adhere to such an organization 
if established. Canada is not without effective bar- 
gaining power in excess even of its potential strength. 
Strategically located at the crossroads of future air 
traffic, its policies in the field of international avia- 
tion may well prove decisive. Perhaps less effective 
will be its bargaining power in freeing international 
trade from the onerous restrictions represented by 
the Ottawa imperial preferences and the American 
tariff, for Canada’s dependence on foreign trade will 
inevitably lead it in the direction of liberalizing trade. 

It is to be hoped that the great powers may 
elaborate a broad security framework wherein coun- 
tries such as Canada may find their proper and satis- 
factory position. If the wider security basis of an 
international organization is not provided, the in- 
ternal contradictions expressed in Canada’s policies 
would eventually defeat its long-term interests. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





The Nazi Economic System, by Otto Nathan. Durham, 

North Carolina, Duke University Press, 1944. $4.00 

A former adviser to the German Ministry of Economics 
presents the most comprehensive available study of the 
Nazi economy, which he describes as a totalitarian system 
of government control within the framework of private 
property and private profit, contrasting it with complete 
state ownership or a democratically planned economy. 


The Americas and Tomorrow, by Virginia Prewett. New 
York, E. P. Dutton and Company, 1944. $3.00 


A discussion of inter-American cooperation and what 
it should mean. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 34, Jung 9, 


1944, Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lust, Secretery; Vana Micue es Duan, Editor. Envered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ee 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








piceaayntene sn ete an tom 2 
= \ 4 ? 7 “e iS as = 


Sean eae 


eine a ee a nn te 
Sep ne artis siie aire sim ir aan wwe pi re 





Washington News Letter 

















REVOLUTIONS TEST GOOD NEIGHBOR POLICY 


While the attention of the United States is neces- 
sarily focused on theatres of war in Europe and 
Asia, the Administration is fully aware of the need 
of cementing our relations with the countries of 
Latin America, some of which have recently dis- 
played tendencies unfriendly to the Good Neighbor 
Policy. 

Since the Spanish Falange has energetic, although 
small, New World outposts which spread propa- 
ganda unfriendly to this country, President Roose- 
velt found it wise on May 30 to say he believes that 
Spain’s activities as a neutral have been less than 
satisfactory. For reasons of expediency, both this 
country and Britain are dealing gently with Spain in 
public, But, while the Franco régime is weaker than 
a year ago, the Falange dominates the Spanish gov- 
ernment, and complacency toward Franco is inter- 
preted as complacency toward the Falange. Thus 
Latin America remains in the foreground of our 
foreign policy. Among the reasons why Secretary of 
State Hull on June 1 gave assurances that small na- 
tions will be “kept on a position of equality with all 
others” is that it is a basic fact of the Good Neigh- 
bor policy that the small and large nations of the 
Americas are equals in international decisions. 

INTERAMERICAN TEST IN ECUADOR. The 
Ecuadorean revolution of May 29, which forced the 
resignation of Dr. Carlos Arroyo del Rio and the 
installation of Dr. José Maria Velasco Ibarra as his 
successor, provides a double test of inter-American 
political cooperation. Resolution 22 of the Rio de 
Janeiro Conference of 1942 calls for consultation 
among the American Republics on the question of 
recognizing governments which take office as the re- 
sult of force. The Republics therefore promptly set 
in motion the machinery of consultation on the 
change in Ecuador. The revolution also raised the 
question whether the new government would abide 
by the inter-American settlement of the Ecuadorean- 
Peruvian boundary dispute on May 21. On May 8 
Dr. Velasco Ibarra, in an interview in Bogota, ex- 
pressed his willingness to accept the settlement which 
transferred to Peru territory formerly claimed by 
Ecuador. 

No indication has come that the consultation un- 
der Resolution 22 will result in nonrecognition of 
the new Ecuadorean government. The revolution, 
which broke out under military leadership a few 
days before the date set for the Presidential election, 
had its origin in domestic affairs, and apparently no 
outside influences were at work, Ecuadoreans have 


FOR VICTORY ° 


been irked by the economic instability of their coun. 
try, which is suffering from inflation, and del Rio 
angered some of the population by keeping in exile 
Velasco Ibarra, leader of the Democratic Alliance 
and his strongest potential opponent in the scheduled 
elections. The revolutionary President promised to 
“deliver the country to a constitutional assembly,” 
which presumably will choose a constitutional Pres. | 
ident. 

The danger of current revolutions in Latin Amer- 
ica is that they might bring to the fore nationalists 
eager to embarrass the United States. This fortunate. 
ly did not prove to be the case in El Salvador, where 
the revolution of May 8 replaced General Maximili- | 
ano Hernandez Martinez in the Presidency with | 
Senator Andres Ignacio Menendez. 

CUBA’S ELECTION. Constitutional processes in 
Cuba on June 2 won the position of President-elect 
for Dr. Ramén Grau San Martin, whose opponent 
in the elections was the government coalition candi- 
date Dr. Carlos Saladrigas. President after the revo- 
lution which overthrew Gerardo Machado in 1933, | 
Grau then was not favored by the United States and 
in 1934 lost his post to Fulgencio Batista, whom he | 
will now succeed. It is encouraging for the future 
of democratic institutions in Cuba that President 











ee 


Batista accepted the defeat of his candidate in a , 


constitutional manner. 

At present, Bolivia is the foremost problem in 
inter-American affairs, and the New World republics 
are reconsidering their refusal to recognize the revo- 
lutionary government of Gualberto Villaroel. The 
governments of Brazil, Chile and Peru are reported 
to have notified Washington that nonrecognition 
puts difficulties in the way of necessary dealings with 
Bolivia. While the United States is eager to coop- 
erate with the other Republics in this matter, its 
policy must be determined by the facts in the case, 


which have just been examined on the spot by Avra / 


Warren, United States Ambassador to Panama. 

The departure from the Villaroel government of 
Paz Estenssoro and others accused of acting as agents 
for interests outside Bolivia unfriendly to Good 
Neighborliness has paved the way for Secretary Hull 
to amend, if the Administration wishes him to, his 
earlier announcement that the United States would 
not deal with the régime. The government of Gen- 
eral Edelmiro Farrell in Argentina, which is follow- 
ing an increasingly nationalistic policy, will continue 
to go unrecognized, however. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


191: 


VoL. | 


————= 


FRE 
T; 


torily 
the ] 
9; a 
Was 
the i 


| have 


the 
part 
doul 
the 
libe: 
L 
velt 
Ger 
ingt 
| rad: 
Thi 
s reta 
| whe 
“di 
Lib 
ord 
der 
me 








