same | 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XIX, No. 31 May 24, 1940 


What are Hitler’s plans for the future of Ger- 
many and of Europe? Read: 


BUILDING THE THIRD REICH 
by John C. deWilde 


25¢ 


World Affairs Pamphlets, No. 5 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., umder the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


re 
949 
Dr. William ¥- Bishop 


wee 


THE UNITED STATES FACES A NEW WORLD ORDER 


my TtH the epic struggle between Germany and the 
Allies entering its second week, the American 
people show signs of yielding to at least five contra- 
dictory tendencies: 1. nation-wide hysteria regarding 
the German menace such as Europeans, even at the 
zero hour, have succeeded in escaping; 2. profound 
defeatism concerning the ultimate outcome of the 

at; 3. criticism of the Allies, on the ground that 
everything they have done has been “‘too little and 
too late’; 4. a panicky urge to arm this country in 
such a way that it will not only be able to resist for- 
eign attack, but also aid the Allies, recognized over- 
night as our first line of defense; and 5. an attempt 
to rationalize the situation by arguing that a German 
victory may, after all, prove less disastrous for Eu- 
tope than had been hitherto assumed. These various 
tendencies, which are bound to determine the poli- 
cies of the United States in the immediate future, 
deserve to be assessed in the light of Europe’s rapidly 
shifting events. 


1, Dangers of Hysteria. The hysteria which gripped 
this country last week is due primarily to the fact that the 
majority of Americans, in spite of repeated warnings by 
President Roosevelt and by many commentators on inter- 
national affairs, were mentally and psychologically unpre- 
pared to face the scope of Hitler’s program, the horrors of 
totalitarian war, and the possibility of Allied defeat. Having 
for years been lulled into the belief that isolation was not 
only desirable, but also practicable, the American people 
were shocked to discover that the United States was, in real- 
ity, on the point of being isolated from Europe and Asia, 
and restricted to the Western Hemisphere. The sudden real- 
ization that the strategic, political and economic premises on 
which our own system has rested may be wiped out in 
Europe, leaving the United States as the sole great exponent 
of democracy and capitalism in the world, has shaken the 
foundation on which millions of Americans had built their 
way of life and their hopes for the future. The repercussions 
of this blow, such as loss of faith in democratic and capital- 
istic institutions may, unless promptly checked, prove more 
dangerous for the United States than its military unpre- 
paredness. 


2. Defeatism about Europe. The very fact that even 
well-informed Americans had until now refused to face the 
possibility of Allied defeat, and had failed to discern the 
character of the revolution represented by Nazism, has 
plunged the United States into the most profound pessim- 
ism. While the position of the Allies is extremely critical, 
the French and British, having seen what happened to the 
Czechs and Poles, will probably resist to the last rather than 
capitulate. The conflict may consequéntly develop from a 
war of armed units into a hand-to-hand struggle, which 
may well destroy large parts of the continent, but may also 
weaken Nazi Germany. We must also take into account 
the thousand and one developments which the present 
battle may precipitate, such as the ultimate shortage of 
Germany's oil resources, severely strained by large-scale use 
of airplanes and tanks, or the possible re-entrance on the 
scene of the Soviet Union, which had hoped for the com- 
plete exhaustion of all belligerents, but would hardly wel- 
come German hegemony of the continent. Until the Allies 
themselves have laid down their arms, the American people 
would be ill-advised to prejudge the outcome of the ict 
by indulging in a defeatism which can only redound to 
Germany’s benefit. 


3. Criticism of the Allies. While proving more vulner- 
able to hysteria and defeatism than the Allies, Americans 
are at the same time unsparing in their criticism of France 
and Britain for Allied failure to meet the German menace 
with adequate armaments. In the last analysis the Allies 
could have equaled Germany’s armaments only if they, like 
Germany, had decided to concentrate all their efforts on 
military pr ar a However justified may be American 
criticisms of the Allies, these criticisms apply also to the 
United States, which has likewise been caught napping by 
the course of events. In essence, what Americans are criti- 
cizing is the failure of the democratic system, which flour- 
ishes best in time of peace, to adopt the methods of military 
dictatorships. 


Whatever difference of opinion there may be regarding 
the character and scope of American aid to the Allies, two 
things must be recognized: at this juncture the Allies need 
not men or credits, but airplanes and other military equip- 
ment; and no matter how great our willingness to help, or 
how effective our ultimate assistance, we are “too late” to 
be of immediate aid, just as the Allies were too late with re- 
spect to Poland, Norway, Holland and Belgium. Yet it 
would be the height of irony if this lateness should now 


4 —~ 
ae ee ; 


iH 
7 
Mf 
Ps) 
ai 
rai 
i 
it 
k 
i 
a 
‘ 


tT 


serve as an ar t for withholding aid, since the war may 
be peolehgll heyood pfesent expectations. 


4. The Call to Arms. An effort to remedy this coun- 
try’s own military deficiencies in record time and with rec- 
ord expenditure was launched by President Roosevelt on 
May 16. This country’s practical defense needs should not 
blind the American people to the fact that, even if Ger- 
many wins a decisive victory in Europe, the immediate ef- 
fects of such a victory on the Western Hemisphere would 
take the form not of military invasion but of invasion by 
Pp da against American institutions and the réle of 
the United States in this hemisphere. As France and Britain, 
and Europe's neutrals, have learned to their disaster, propa- 
ganda working on dissatisfied, weary and disillusioned 
people can circumvent military preparations. If the Allies 
now succeed in halting Germany, this will not be due solely 
to military skill or equipment—for these Germany, too, has 
at its command—but to the fact that the menace of an- 
nihilation has strengthened the morale of the Allies, ended 
their political disunity, and forced subordination of private 
interests to the preservation of national existence. To this 
extent, Hitler’s Blitzkrieg might, in the end, prove a boom- 
erang for Germany by consolidating France, Britain and 
other countries against the inroads of Nazi propaganda, and 
hastening the moral, social and economic reconstruction 
long overdue in the Western democracies. 


5. Effects of German Vict 


Such a reconstruction 
would prove the best answer to 


e argument, born of de- 


Page Two = 


— 


featism and fear of war, that a German victory might afte 
all prove more tolerable for Europe than had been expected, 
There is no doubt that the European continent has suffered 
from many political and economic maladjustments whic 
France and Britain, at the zenith of their power and infly. 
ence, had done little or nothing to correct. It is also trye 
that, in the long run, Europe might find under Nazi rule 
that political and economic unification which many Weg. 
erners had hoped—thus far in vain—might be effected 
the Allies. But it would be an illusion to believe that this 
unification could take place on any other basis than the sy 
pression of those individual liberties and human values 
which European civilization has developed in the course of 
centuries and, through the world empires of France and 
Britain, has spread to other countries. 


It would be equally illusory to believe that, if Europe 
succumbs to Nazi rule, the United States will be free, in 
relative security, to carry high the torch of civilization, as 
many Americans have said it should do, or pursue its tradi. 
tional way of life undisturbed. Our course must be charted 
anew, in waters made perilous by new and unforeseen dan. 
gers. Not only those who believed in intervention abroad, 
but also the Charles Beard school of ‘‘continentalists,” are 
now confronted with the task of reshaping domestic and 
foreign policy in such a way as to assure this country agains 


the kind of gradual erosion to which Hitler’s threats of force 
had reduced France and Britain on the eve of the present 
war. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


ALLIES REEL UNDER NAZI BLOWS 


Striking with unparalleled intensity in what must 
be the most powerful assault in history, German 
armed forces have battered the Allied armies to 
the verge of defeat in less than a fortnight and 
are rapidly advancing toward their final objectives. 
At no time during the last war—neither before the 
battle of the Marne in 1914, nor during the German 
offensives in the spring of 1918—was the outlook 
for the British and French so dark. The Allies have 
thus far been outmaneuvered and outfought by su- 
perior forces. They are exposed to the most serious 
dangers, on land and sea and particularly in the air. 
It may yet be possible to stabilize the new battle 
fronts for a certain period, if the tremendous 
wastage and extended communications which neces- 
sarily accompany an offensive on the grand scale 
compel the Nazis to slow their forward movements. 
It may be possible for the Allies to launch counter- 
attacks on the flanks of the vast Nazi protrusion into 
French territory, if they can still collect a large mass 
of maneuver and protect their own transport against 
disorganization by German aviation. But even as- 
suming that such conditions develop, Britain and 
France must face the prospect of months of gruelling 
warfare for which they have not been adequately 
prepared. The only alternative is surrender. 


THE GERMAN ONSLAUGHT. Since May 10, 
when the invasion of the Low Countries began, the 


progress of the Germans has been nothing short of 
phenomenal. Despite its recently intensified defense 


preparations and a supposedly strong system of 
water defenses, the Netherlands succumbed in five 
days to Nazi land and air attack. Meanwhile, in 
Belgium, the German troops had rolled past the un- 
conquered forts of Liége, and pierced the wooded 
hills of the Ardennes, taking the French frontier 
town of Sedan on May 14. A day later, forces thrown 
against the weakly defended line of the Meuse be 
tween Namur and Montmédy breached the Allied 
defense works and fanned out rapidly to the west. 
The ensuing advance by Nazi mechanized divisions, 
working in closest cooperation with dive bombers 
and other planes and followed by motorized in 
fantry units, has been retarded but not halted by 
furious melees with French tanks and infantry. On 
May 20 the attackers took St. Quentin, about 80 
miles northeast of Paris, and other columns were 
pushing westward from a line extending from Maw 
beuge to Laon. To preserve contact with the main 
French armies, the British, Belgian and French 
forces north of the area of greatest penetration fell 
back toward the Channel ports before the enemy 
pressure, permitting the Germans to enter Brussels 
on May 17 and Antwerp the following day. On 
May 21 the German High Command claimed that its 
units had reached the French coast at Abbeville. Be 
hind the advance lines, however, there were mafy 
islands of allied resistance. The outcome of the wat 
now depends on the ability of the Germans to cot 
solidate their grip on the territory they have 9 


a 
{ ly Ov! 
fom the sl 
NAZI S’ 
man camps 
srategists 
plan for th 
fications 1 
visaged a 
sium, enve 
ound a p 
east of L 
swings ins 
the Englis 
Western 
Hitler i 
tives as lo 
plies the « 
edly desir 
French, w 
and the B 
the fate c 
continenta 
1914-1918 
known w 
nerve-cent 
forces by 
the Magi 
aims and 
as an effe 
The an 
determine 
tériel and 
series of 
the speec 
methods | 
have bee: 
fensive, 
develope 
open co 
weapons 
armored 
been ger 
of 75-m 
against 1 
perate 
the Gerr 
of the G 
widen e 
an Oppo 
trary, m 
front wl 
mass th 
units ne 


FOREIGN 
Headquartes 
Entered as 


es) 


n of 
- five 
e, in 
e un. 
oded 
ntier 
rown 
e be 
[lied 
west. 
ions, 
abers 
1 in 


d by 


—_— 
— 


ickly overrun, before the Allies can recuperate 
fom the shock and destruction of battle. 

NAZI STRATEGY AND TACTICS. As the Ger- 
man campaign unfolds, it is apparent that the Nazi 
srategists have basically altered the von Schlieffen 
plan for the invasion of France, employed with mod- 
fications in the offensive of 1914. That plan en- 
visaged a great wheeling movement through Bel- 
gium, enveloping Paris from the North and pivoting 
sound a point on the Franco-German frontier south- 
ast of Luxembourg. Today the “closing door” 
wings instead in a great arc from Luxembourg to 
the English Channel, from a stationary position in 
Western Holland. 

Hitler is obviously concealing his precise objec- 
tives as long as possible, for by doing so he multi- 
plies the difficulties of the defenders. He undoubt- 
edly desires to sow seeds of discord between the 
French, who are concerned for the safety of Paris, 
and the British, who are probably preoccupied with 
the fate of the Channel ports which serve as their 
continental bases. Such difficulties, not unknown in 
1914-1918, may once more arise until it is definitely 
known whether the Germans wish to capture the 
nerve-center of France, cut off the northern Allied 
forces by a dash to the sea, turn southward to take 
the Maginot line from the rear, or combine these 
aims and at one swoop annihilate the Allied armies 
as an effective fighting force. 

The amplitude of the German objectives will be 
determined in large part by the extent of the ma- 
tériel and personnel available to continue the rapid 
series of hammer blows delivered thus far, and by 
the speed with which the Allies are able to devise 
methods of parrying them. The French, for example, 
have been forced in a few days to abandon the de- 
fensive, positional tactics which they so arduously 
developed during the last twenty years. Fighting in 
open country, they have found their anti-tank 
weapons ineffective against the masses of heavily 
armored German tanks whose existence had not 
been generally known, and have utilized thousands 
of 75-millimeter field guns for point-blank fire 
against them. Improvisation of this type and des- 
perate counter-offensive measures are necessary if 
the German drive is to be stemmed. For the essence 
of the German infiltration scheme is immediately to 
widen every gap in the enemy’s line before he has 
an Opportunity to close it. The Allies, on the con- 
trary, must strive to re-form a strong, continuous 
front which they may hold until they can create and 
mass the superior force of planes and mechanized 
units needed for the attack. 


Page Three 


ALLIES GIRD FOR DEATH STRUGGLE. 
Spurred on in their efforts by events in the field, the 
chiefs of state in Paris and London are rapidly co- 
ordinating their administrations for vigorous prose- 
cution of a totalitarian war. On May 17, after 
Premier Reynaud had told the French Chamber of 
Deputies a day earlier that “methods and men” 
might have to be changed, he altered the composi- 
tion of his cabinet and, by assuming the post of 
War Minister, centralized direction of the military 
effort in his own hands. Edouard Daladier, the pre- 
ceding defense minister, was made Minister of For- 
eign Affairs. The aged Marshal, Henri Philippe 
Pétain, symbol of French resistance at Verdun, be- 
came Vice-Premier. Georges Mandel, one of 
Clémenceau’s most energetic protégés, was made 
Minister of the Interior, where he will be in a posi- 
tion to carry out Premier Reynaud’s warning that 
weakness will be punished by death. To direct the 
military operations, General Maxime Weygand was 
appointed on May 19 to replace General Maurice 
Gustave Gamelin as commander of the French forces. 
General-staff leadership thus falls from the hands 
of an exponent of defensive warfare into those of a 
disciple and former subordinate of Marshal Foch, 
who directed the great Allied attacks of 1918. 

In Britain Prime Minister Winston Churchill ap- 
pears to have succeeded in shocking the British out 
of the complacency with which they have viewed 
the war since its inception. The imminent danger of 
air attack from near-by Nazi bases in the Low Coun- 
tries has led to the rapid formation of a volunteer 
defense corps to combat German parachutists. This 
force is already said to comprise 500,000 men. Bar- 
ricades have been set up at points on the Channel 
coast, along important roads, and around govern- 
ment buildings in London. In a radio address deliv- 
ered on May 19, Mr. Churchill sought to prepare 
Britain for a direct attack by the Nazis as soon as 
the front in France was stabilized. Pleading for 
greater munitions production, he forecast that the 
“most drastic” steps would be taken to call forth 
“the last ounce and the last inch of effort” from the 
British people. Here as in France the restraints of 
democratic government are disappearing, along with 
the processes of private production, at least for the 
duration of the war. In the face of extreme emer- 
gency, such measures are necessary if nations are to 
retain their independence. The great question is 
whether these developments, so long avoided be- 
cause they are distasteful to democratic states, have 
been taken in time to prevent defeat. 

Davip H. PopPEr 


POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 31, May 24, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lust, Secretary; Vera Micugies Dagan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Bess 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


ose 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Buliding 


May 20.—As the gigantic battle on the western 
front enters its decisive stage, Washington is fever- 
ishly engaged in preparing the legislation to carry 
out the vast emergency defense program urged by 
President Roosevelt in his message to Congress on 
May 16. With virtually all opposition swept away by 
the possibility of an overwhelming German victory in 
Europe, Congressional subcommittees have already 
incorporated most of the new requests in the regu- 
lar Army and Navy appropriation bills which are 
being rushed to final action. Within another ten 
days or two weeks, in all probability, Congress will 
have voted the additional $1,182,000,000 requested 
by the President, thus committing the United States 
to the expenditure of well over three billion dollars 
for defense before June 30, 1941. 

UNSOLVED DEFENSE PROBLEMS. When 
these new defense funds are voted, however, there 
will be no assurance that either Congress or the 
Administration is much closer to a solution of the 
very real problems confronting the United States. 
If a successful resistance by the Allies is now re- 
garded as a vital interest of the United States, the 
hysterical voting of additional deficit millions can- 
not meet the issue. For in the short run, the emer- 
gency program can have almost no effect on the 
outcome of the present death struggle in Europe. At 
best, it will require between eighteen months and 
two years to accomplish the vast expansion of plants 
and personnel to turn out 50,000 airplanes a year— 
far too long if the result on the western front is de- 
termined in the next few weeks, or even the next 
six months. Should the Allies make a successful 
stand, this country would continue to serve as a base 
of supply, with the prospect of increasing our rate 
of production to 1,000 planes a month by December. 

Nor will the long-term problems be solved merely 
by voting additional millions, increasing working 
hours, and scrapping “restrictive” wage legislation 
like the Walsh-Healy Act, without any conception of 
what kind of defense we are preparing for. 


The theoretical alternatives which seemed so 
plausible only yesterday have been perilously nar- 
rowed by the hard realities of today. Whereas it 
seemed possible before the invasion of the Low 
Countries to contemplate aid to the Allies by 
measures “short of war,” it will no longer be pos- 
sible to evade the issue of direct intervention if 
Great Britain and France are able to hold out 


through the summer. For if we conclude that oy 
security is imperiled by a German victory, then th 
only honest course is to mobilize our full econom 
and military strength behind the Allies. Such , 
course will not permit the luxury of selling airplang 
on a “cash-and-carry” basis; it will mean facing th 
probability of total war next spring, and organiziny 
our military and naval program accordingly. | 
might permit the retention of the Navy in the Pa 
cific for the present. But if British sea power wer 
threatened in the Atlantic or the Mediterranean, j 
would inevitably compel the transfer of at least ; 
part of our fleet, leaving Japan free in the Westem 
Pacific. Under such a program, our Army would kk 
faced with the problem of reorganizing its “pm 
tective mobilization plan,” now designed to furnis, 
a covering force of some 750,000 primarily for con 
tinental defense, in favor of an expanded program 
based on the possibility of overseas war. 


On the other hand, yesterday's theoretical program 
of hemisphere defense is equally distorted by th 
sudden prospect of a decisive German victory. Ou 
present Navy, which is now stronger than at any 
time since 1921, was built at great cost on the a 
sumption that a single first-class fleet, backed by 
small professional Army and a modern air force, 
would be capable of defending the sea and air ap 
proaches to the United States and protecting ou 
vital trade routes. The Navy today is adequate for 
this purpose against any single foreign power, ot 
against any probable combination as long as British 
sea power controls the Atlantic. The report of the 
Senate Naval Affairs Committee on the expansion 
bill, issued last week, strongly defends a program of 
Western Hemisphere defense even if British se 
power is destroyed, and holds that this would be fat 
less costly than participation in war in Europe of 
Asia. The report, however, suggests the logical but 
disconcerting corollaries of such a program: the 
necessity of preventing Germany from gaining 1 
foothold in the hemisphere, American control of 
naval and air bases, a two-ocean navy, and other 
measures which threaten a revival of imperialism. 


Much of the confusion surrounding the defens 
program arises from the fact that it calls for both 
kinds of defense—preparation for further aid to tht 
Allies if there is time, and hemisphere defense it 
case of a German victory. The confusion might be 
reduced if the Administration gave its support to a 
impartial defense commission to re-examine 
whole problem. W. T. STONE 


A discu 
of the E 
also on 
self-gov 


Headline Bo 


a 
—_—-——— 


HE A 

May 2 
of his mi 
render, th 
troops in 
broadcast, 
out consu 
render 0} 
ports, thr 
now been 

While 
around t 
and mov 
Churchill 
fense of 
since 10 
1588, by 
who ent 
British sl 
in the W 
pelins rz 
however, 
feasible 
the imm: 
ment toc 
—conscr 
of treacl 
to this 
governm 
position 
Secretar 
Cripps, 
Soviet L 
expert, 
were ap 
agreeme 
Cripps 
and pa 


