ist 
n- 
he 
L5. 
ti- 
PC. 
cn 
ist 


ork, 


ork, 


and 


ges 
ire, 


ub- 


OREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 











Entered as second- 
class matter December 























neutrality law, which expires on May 1, Congress 
is about to resume its debate on the contentious 
issue of “neutrality.” The conflicting views which 
found expression in August 1935 when the tem- 
porary act was passed, and in February 1936 
when it was renewed, are again found in the cur- 
rent proposals. As in the past, the so-called 
“mandatory” thesis is represented by several reso- 
lutions which seek to extend embargoes on sup- 
plementary war materials to all belligerents, leav- 
ing the President a minimum of discretion in 
applying rules laid down by Congress. At the 
other extreme are bills and resolutions which ad- 
vocate the widest executive discretion, giving the 
President authority to discriminate between bel- 
ligerents. Halfway between are a group of reso- 
lutions which would renew the present law, apply- 
ing embargoes without discrimination to all bel- 
ligerents, while allowing considerable discretion 
to the President in determining what action to 
take in specific situations. 


Despite the old cleavage between “mandatory” 
and “discretionary” legislation, the gap is not as 
wide as it was in 1935 and 1936. The extent to 
which both extremes have shifted position is re- 
vealed by the main features of the three proposals 
which are receiving the closest attention by the 
State Department and the two Congressional com- 


mittees. These may be summarized briefly as 
follows: 


Pittman Resolution (S.J. Res. 51) Extends present 
neutrality act with amendments. Retains mandatory 
embargo on arms and ammunition, loans and credits. 
Adds new provisions forbidding arms shipments in 
case of civil war, and giving the President discretion- 
ary authority to prohibit American vessels from carry- 
ing “certain articles or materials” in addition to arms 
and ammunition to any belligerent country. 

McReynolds Resolution (H.J. Res. 147) Includes 
mandatory embargo on arms and ammunition, loans 
and credits. Provides for arms embargo in case of 





terials” to a normal peace-time quota; to prohibit 
American vessels from carrying arms and other ma- 
terials; to restrict travel by American citizens, etc. 
Drops reservation exempting Latin American states 
from provisions of existing act. 


Clark, Vandenberg, Bone and Nye (S.J. Res. 60) Ex- 
tends present act with amendments. Renews manda- 
tory embargo on arms and ammunition, loans and 
credits. Adds new provision covering case of civil 
war. Embodies “cash and carry” plan by forbidding 
any American citizen to retain any “right, title or in- 
terest in any article or commodity exported by sea” 
to belligerent countries. 

These measures represent important conces- 
sions by both extremes. All three would renew 
the existing act, would extend the arms embargo 
to cases of civil war and would apply all embar- 
goes without discrimination. The “mandatory” 
group, abandoning its original demand for sweep- 
ing embargoes on supplementary war materials, 
would give the President considerable discretion 
in applying the “cash and carry” plan under which 
all commercial transactions would be conducted 
at the risk of belligerents. 

While these proposals fail to meet the desires of 
either the State Department or extreme advocates 
of “mandatory” legislation, they apparently afford 
a basis for compromise which would allow the 
President to pursue a foreign policy compatible 
with the interests of peace. The existing neutral- 
ity law made it possible for the Roosevelt Admin- 
istration to embargo arms and ammunition in the 
Italo-Ethiopian conflict, thus removing the danger 
of a conflict with the League over the issue of 
neutral rights claimed by the United States in the 
past. Renewal of the existing law, with its addi- 
tional embargo on loans and credits, would not 
hamper any genuine future effort by League 
members to apply the principles of collective ac- 
tion but would leave the United States free to 
determine its course in the event of a major war 
in which League members were divided among 





pce 2, 1921, the Post 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year Office at ‘New York, 
N. Y., under the 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3. 1879. sy 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Vout. XVI, No. 16 FEBRUARY 12, 1937 
JOIN NOW 
STUDENT MEMBERSHIP Dr. William W. bishop | 
60 f : ! 
cents for February 1-June 1 % University of Michigan Library 
Foreign Policy Bulletin—weekly oe | 
Headline Books—one issue Ann Arbor, Mich. 
Special subscription rates for Foreign Policy Reports 
and Washington News Letter. 
ITH the introduction of more than a dozen civil war. Discretionary provisions authorizing Presi- 
resolutions to amend or replace the existing dent to restrict export of “certain articles or ma- 





oF ea, 
asa 


SS 


of 


} 
‘4 
> ae 
€: 
fs! 
j 


adhe oF ine 
>> = 


Been 


XA PESTER geek ¥ 

















themselves. In abandoning the “mandatory” em- 
bargo on supplementary war materials in favor 


‘of the “cash and carry” plan, the United States 


would not close its markets entirely to belliger- 
ent nations, but would narrow the area of conflict 
by keeping American vessels and American- 
owned cargoes out of war zones. 

Objections will be raised against the adoption 
of such a compromise as the permanent policy of 
the United States. The “cash and carry” prin- 
ciple will invariably favor the belligerent with 
control of the seas. In any war involving Great 
Britain it would favor the British Empire. In a 
war between Japan and China it would aid Japan. 
But in the present state of world affairs, this lim- 
ited renunciation of neutral rights may provide a 
useful formula which would help safeguard the 
United States against involvement in war while 
not impeding efforts toward a genuine political 
and economic settlement in Europe. 

WILLIAM T. STONE 


GERMANY’S ECONOMIC PLIGHT 

The unfavorable German reaction to recent 
Franco-British offers of financial and economic 
cooperation seems to indicate that economic con- 
ditions in the Reich are not as bad as is generally 
assumed. The British and French governments 
apparently believed Germany’s plight was so 
desperate that Hitler might make political con- 
cessions in return for economic assistance. In- 
stead, the Fuehrer scornfully refused to rely on 
foreign assurances of aid. 

While conservative officials associated with the 
Reichsbank and Ministry of Economics still talk 
in terms of international trade, the radical Nazis 
who now appear to be in the saddle regard the 
new Four-Year Plan as a means of achieving their 
long-cherished ideals of autarchy. They hold that 
“political freedom” for Germany necessitates a 
large measure of economic independence as well, 
and are therefore determined to push ahead rap- 
idly with the Four-Year Plan which, in their 
opinion, is by no means impossible of realization. 
Already Germany can satisfy more than half of 
its requirements of light motor fuel, and the day 
is not far distant when nearly all of its supply 
will come from domestic sources. Progress has 
also been made in the production of flax and hemp, 
and plants for the manufacture of synthetic fiber 
have increased so rapidly that present capacity 
is equal to 14 or 16 per cent of the consumption of 
cotton and wool. Continuation of these and simi- 
lar efforts require burdensome sacrifices from 
labor and capital, but there is little indication that 
the German people refuse to shoulder them. 

Since Germany must meanwhile rely heavily 


Page Two 





————— 
— 





on imports, its small supply of gold and foreign 
exchange arouses keen anxiety. Superficially the 
situation improved considerably in 1936 when the 
export surplus amounted to 550 million marks ag 
compared with only 111 million in the previous 
year. The rapid expansion of exports to overseas 
countries was particularly encouraging. Since 
the first quarter of 1935 sales abroad have risen 
in value as well as volume, and the continuous de- 


cline in the volume of imports was reversed after | 


the first quarter of last year. The cost of im- 
ports, however, is rapidly increasing, while ex- 
port prices are still falling. Moreover, the export 
surplus netted little additional foreign exchange. 
The available exchange supply was greatly re- 
duced by debt payments, commercial losses due 
to devaluation of gold bloc currencies, the sale of 
goods on credit, and the continued illegal export 
of capital. In November the government required 


the deposit of foreign securities in order to pre- | 


vent smuggling and make possible, whenever 
necessary, the gradual sale of German holdings 
abroad. The following month the death penalty 
was decreed for persons guilty of willfully vio- 
lating the provisions prohibiting capital export, 
although subsequently an amnesty was promised 
to all those surrendering foreign assets within a 
stated period. These measures are said to have 
produced 170 million marks in much-needed for- 
eign exchange. 


With the aid of additional imports of grain, | 


Germany should be able to weather the winter 
without a serious food shortage. The depletion 
of grain supplies has been offset to some extent by 
a good potato harvest and excellent fodder and 
hay crops. Some foods, notably beef and dairy 
products, will undoubtedly be relatively scarce, 
but consumption can be shifted to foodstuffs of 
vegetable origin of which Germany has an ample 
supply. While the choice of German housewives 
is seriously limited, no one should starve. 

Rearmament and the Four-Year Plan have 
placed a severe strain on German finances. The 
capacity of the market to absorb additional loans 
is becoming more limited, particularly now that 
German industry is experiencing greater need 
for capital to extend plants and make replace- 
ments. The government, however, has been able 
to finance an increasing amount of extraordinary 
expenditures out of its own resources. In the 
current fiscal year alone the Reich has at its dis- 
posal about 7 billion marks more than in 1932- 
1933. Taking everything into consideration, 
Germany can probably afford to wait until France 
and Britain make more generous offers. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 16, Fesruary 12, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasts BuELL, President; EstHEr G. OGpEN, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dsan, Editor. | 


National 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





FC 


An | 


\3| 





~ 
rs 














