BEBstaa8 Il 


‘liance 
yicture 
Knopf, 


, Writ 
y pro 
mu 
t from 
»xperi- 


Jilliam 
Knopf, 


he his- 
vealth. 


> aver- 
ents of 


43 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


University of Michigen AUG 24 1943 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 44 


Avucust 20, 1943 


QUEBEC MEETING FACES DECISION ON POLICY FOR LIBERATED EUROPE 


HE sixth major Anglo-American wartime meet- 

ing, which is scheduled to reach its climax this 
week when Roosevelt and Churchill meet in Quebec, 
comes at a time when the United Nations are beset 
by many pressing problems in Europe. Although the 
conference is officially advertised as a military par- 
ley, representatives from Britain, Canada and the 
United States must also inevitably turn to some of 
the larger political issues which can no longer be 
ignored or postponed now that their armed forces 
are actually on European soil. As a result of the 
Allied victory in Sicily, questions concerning mili- 
tary occupation and ultimate peace settlements have 
been removed from the realm of the academic. 
The day for general theoretical pronouncements on 
the order of the Atlantic Charter, which was two 


| years old on August 14, is past and the moment has 


come when more precise plans are needed. 

POLICY TOWARD LIBERATED COUNTRIES. 
One question that requires a more clearly defined 
Allied answer is, who is slated to take over the job 
of administering Axis-occupied nations after the 
Germans and Italians are forced out? Throughout 
the war the governments-in-exile have assumed that 
they would receive a large share of responsibility 
during the period of transition from war to peace in 
their respective countries, but some confusion has 
recently arisen over the Anglo-American attitude 
toward them. Doubts about British and United 
States policy toward the liberated countries on the 
morrow of Axis defeat have been fostered by the 
ambiguity that attaches to AMGOT. Because the 
Allied Military Government of Occupied Territories 
is a new organization about which very little is 
known outside the councils of the British and U:S. 
military men who are directly in charge of its pro- 
tam, there has been abundant opportunity for 
tumors and suspicions concerning its prescribed role 
in liberated countries. As long as Allied policy on 


this subject remains vague or only tacitly under- 
stood, the training of British and American officers 
and enlisted men in the language, laws and local 
traditions of Poland, Yugoslavia, Norway, and so 
on, may be interpreted as identical with prepara- 
tions for military occupation of enemy territory. 
Since, however, it might prove not only impractical 
for AMGOT to assume such large-scale duties but 
also politically unfortunate, it is to be hoped that 
the Quebec conference will produce a policy of active 
cooperation with representatives of the liberated 
nations. 

By granting the long-delayed Anglo-American 
recognition to the French National Committee in 
Algiers, the Quebec meeting could give a concrete 
demonstration of Allied solidarity with those groups 
in the Axis-conquered countries which have con- 
sistently aided the United Nations. Now that 
de Gaulle and Giraud have at last proved the ex- 
istence of their fundamental unity, the way is open 
to the United States and Britain to help Frenchmen 
restore peace to France. By extending recognition 
to the French Committee, increased confidence would 
also be given to other statesmen-in-exile who have 
served their countries and the United Nations well 
during the war, despite the lack of an official pre- 
war mandate from their people. Before hastily la- 
belling such leaders “unrepresentative,” it must be 
recalled that wartime conditions made it impossible 
for the exiled governments to maintain their pre- 
war régimes completely intact, and that some 
changes effected without benefit of popular vote on 
the eve of Axis invasion or afterwards eliminated 
appeasement or pro-Nazi elements. Having organ- 
ized their nations’ support of the war despite crush- 
ing defeats, these leaders in London deserve an 
opportunity to aid their countries in recovering from 
enemy occupation. This does not mean, however, 
that exiled ministers should be given Allied props 


ee 3 
St a ee 
En 


+ 6S nh Oe a 


=z. 


- —— 
Ss oe at 


oe 


r — —— —— = — 
2 Bde we Oe ee ews as cee ee deo -seee s: 
- 


SESE Pegs Two 


on which to lean in case they find it impossible to 
stand unaided in their own countries because, once 
the orderly processes of government are restored, 
the people themselves must be free to choose whom 
they please. In every underground movement today 
there is undoubtedly a large reservoir of new leader- 
ship, and opportunities must exist for tapping it soon 

FUTURE OF ENEMY NATIONS. Another diffi- 
cult question that will come up in Quebec is the 
future of Italy and Germany. The Italian press reit- 
erates the hope that the “unconditional surrender” 
decree handed down at Casablanca will be revised 
in Canada, but there is no indication that this will 
be done. The problem of defeating Germany de- 
cisively is, however, more complicated for, in order 
to make sure that the Germans will not threaten the 
peace of the world again, the United States, Britain 
and the U.S.S.R. must reach a far more perfect un- 
derstanding than now seems to exist, not only on 
basic military questions but on equally important 
political policies. It is vital to the goal of “uncondi- 


——<<—— 


tional surrender”’ that the intentions of the three pri. 
cipal United Nations coincide since, if the Anglo. 
American bloc goes one way and the Soviet Union 
another, Germany stands an excellent chance of 
escaping the worst consequences of defeat and of 
being able to revive its military power within 4 
comparatively few years. The Nazis ‘seem to be well 
aware that their last hope of escaping true defeat lies 
in the possibility of playing the United Nations of 
against each other, for their press emphasizes the 
fact that Russia is not participating in the Queber 
conference and is again criticizing the United States 
and Britain for their failure to attack Germany in 
Western Europe by land as well as air. It is well to 
remember, however, that Stalin will undoubtedly be 
kept informed of developments at Quebec. Further. 
more, formulation at the conference of more precise 
plans for the postwar disposition of Germany can do 
much to increase Russia's confidence in the possibility 
of future security through cooperation with Britain 
and the United States. 
WinirreD N. HapseE 


WHAT IS THE TRUTH ABOUT CHINA’S ARMIES? 


Reports that the current Anglo-American discus- 
sions in Quebec may lead to significant decisions on 
Pacific war strategy bring to the forefront the ques- 
tion of the strength of the Chinese armies. For the 
United Nations will be greatly interested in the type 
of diversionary operations that can be expected from 
China, when large-scale ground campaigns begin in 
Burma or the East Indies. And, if advanced Chinese 
bases are some day to serve as a means of conducting 
extensive bombings of Japan, Manchuria and coastal 
China, the ability of Chinese troops to prevent the 
Japanese from seizing these fields will be of consid- 
erable importance. The problem, in a nutshell, is 
whether in the future Chungking’s armies can be 
expected only to hold on at a minimum level or 
whether, despite all difficulties, they can develop a 
new striking power by using their existing resources 
more effectively, in combination with larger quanti- 
ties of foreign supplies. 

DECLINE OF THE CHINA FRONT. It should 
be understood at the outset that, in view of the re- 
markable contributions made by China to the war 
against Japan and the many shortcomings of United 
States policy in Asia before and after Pearl Harbor, 
Americans have no special moral right to reproach 
Chungking. The right is of a practical nature—the 
necessity of one ally’s considering the activities of 
another in order to make suggestions about possible 
improvements. For there is little doubt that in the 
past year and a half, except for a few significant 
but restricted Japanese campaigns, the China front 
has seen engagements of only a minor character. It 
is true that mobile warfare involves many small ac- 


tions that may bulk large in the aggregate; but 
this does not explain the marked decline in the num- 
ber of Japanese troops in China, or Chungking’s ad- 
mission that the scale of the fighting has lessened. 

According to an official statement published in 
March of this year, some 53,000 Japanese troops 
were killed in 1942, as compared with 148,000 in 
1938, 136,000 in 1939, 114,000 in 1940 and 105,000 
in 1941. Figures for Japanese wounded show a 
similar downward trend. There is no occasion fot 
surprise at the drop from the first war years when 
major battles went on for a number of centers, but 
the decline by approximately one-half from 1941 to 
1942 cannot be accounted for in this way. More- 
over, according to Chinese calculations, there are 
about thirty Japanese divisions of less than 20,000 
men each in China—at the most something under 
600,000 men—while thirty-nine of the best divisions 
are stationed in Manchuria and Korea, where there is 
at present no actual front but only a potential one 
against Russia. Some estimates for China are consid- 
erably lower; but, in any event, the number of Jap 
anese troops has been reduced in striking fashion 
even though China continues to be the major area of 
fighting in Asia. 

CAN CHINA DO MORE? The decreased effec 
tiveness of Chinese resistance is unquestionably 
closely related to the cutting off of major sources 
of foreign supplies. Yet although China is thereby 
prevented from conducting large-scale ground ac 
tions, it is doubtful whether this alone can explain 
the low level of military operations—especially since 
every observer of Chinese affairs is aware of spec 


—— 
ylation, b 
make civ 
with the 
structive i 
Group / 
warfare 1 
more tha 
it establi: 
tors repc 
speculatic 
There 
ment in t 
ous short 
tions On 
nese Mir 
to these 
uniforms 
brought | 
No sand 
the soldi 
ration is 
order mx 
units or | 
but this 
the office 
their me 
issue the 
within tk 


In a j 
they wet 
and Prir 
tremely 
Allied b 
and July 
boats we 
six mon 
U-boat 
months . 


RUSS 
comm 
Will i 
politic 
the U 

THI 


REF 
——_____ 
FOREIGN | 
Headquarter: 


second-class 
one month | 


Bo 181 


- but 
num- 
'S ad- 
ed. 

ad in 
roops 
00 in 
5,000 
yw a 
n for 
when 
;, but 
41 to 
More- 
e are 
0,000 
ander 
isions 
ere is 
| one 
ynsid- 
 Jap- 
shion 
ea of 


effec: 
nably 
yurces 
ereby 
d ac 
plain 
since 
spec: 


—_—_— 
—_ 


Page Three 


ylation, hoarding and other conditions that not only 
make civilian life difficult but inevitably interfere 
with the functioning of the armed forces. It is in- 
structive in this connection to note that the Eighteenth 
Group Army, engaged in mobile and guerrilla 
warfare in north and northwest China, claims to have 
more than maintained the level of enemy casualties 
it established earlier in the war. Many foreign visi- 
tors report that in this war theatre inflation and 
speculation are at a minimum. 

There appears to be much room for improve- 
ment in the organization of the Chinese Army. Vari- 
ous shortcomings are indicated in the new regula- 
tions on treatment of recruits published by the Chi- 
nese Ministry of War on June 11, 1943. According 
to these provisions, officers who confiscate blankets, 
uniforms, shoes, mosquito netting, and other articles 
brought by the recruits are to be severely punished. 
No sand or other foreign matter is to be added to 
the soldier's daily rice allotment, and the size of the 
ration is fixed at 24 ounces. Officers are permitted to 
order men to perform labor service for their own 
units or for the localities in which they are stationed, 
but this must not interfere with training. Nor may 
the officers accept compensation for work done by 
their men. The fact that it was found necessary to 
issue these regulations is suggestive of conditions 
within the Army. It is even more significant that after 


Sareea 


six years of war, the Chinese conscription law has 
still not been carried out fully. 


The causes of the conditions described can hardly 
be found in the difficulty of securing supplies from 
abroad. Basically, the explanation appears to lie in po- 
litical, social and economic circumstances in Chinese 
life—the important position held by speculators, the _ 
weakness of popular influence in the formulation and 
execution of policy, and the fact that some Army 
citcles are motivated by points of view dating from 
the days of civil war and provincial warlordism. It 
does not follow that the advances made by the Chi- 
nese since 1937 are negligible or that their nation- 
hood is to be questioned. Nor was it to be expected 
that the National Government could quickly rid 
itself of imperfections stemming from past condi- 
tions. It is a question rather of the direction in which 
the country is moving—whether it will return to the 
unifying, progressive policies that marked the open- 
ing period of the war in order to fight effectively 
against conditions that are sapping its military 
strength. Or whether it is headed for deepening 
internal difficulties and consequently a less important 
position in the United Nations war effort. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


series of 


(This is th é na ina 


is the sec four articles 
on the pre Omi crisis 


in China.) 


CHARTER OF U.S. SHIPS RAISES POST-WAR PROBLEM 


In a joint statement issued on August 14 while 
they were meeting at Hyde Park, President Roosevelt 
and Prime Minister Churchill made known the ex- 
tremely favorable progress being achieved in the 
Allied battle against the U-boat. During May, June 
and July, the statement revealed, a total of 90 U- 
boats were sent to the bottom. Moreover, in the first 
sx months of 1943 the number of ships sunk by 
U-boat operations was only half that in the last six 
months of 1942, and only a quarter that in the first 


RUSSIA: What are its frontiers? Will it spread 

communism? Will it try to dominate Germany? 

Will it change its economic system? Will it undergo 

political change? What is the future of religion in 

the U.S.S.R. Read— 

THE U.S.S.R. AND POST-WAR EUROPE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


August 15 issue of FoREIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members $3. 


half of 1942. As a result of this decline in U-boat 
effectiveness, new ships completed by the Allies in 1943 
exceeded all sinkings from all causes by more than 
3,000,000 tons. Although the Allied leaders warned 
that the battle against the U-boat would have to be 
still further intensified, this vastly improved shipping 
picture will undoubtedly give greater freedom of 
action to the Allied army, navy and air chiefs now 
meeting in Quebec than they have enjoyed at any 
previous conference. 

CHARTER OF AMERICAN SHIPS. But as ship- 
ping becomes less crucial in the planning of military 
victory, it seems to become more important in dis- 
cussions of the post-war world. Indeed, it promises 
to be one of the major problems which will face the 
United Nations, particularly the United States and 
Britain, when victory over the Axis is won. This is 
indicated not only by the concern felt in Britain over 
the tremendous wartime expansion of the Unitec 
States Merchant Marine—now larger than the Brit- 
ish—but by the reported reaction in American ship- 
ping circles when Admiral Land announced on July 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 44, Aucust 20, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leg, Secretary; Vera Micue.es Dean, Editor. Envered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


One month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Bw 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


i wie — ot Sipe ’ 


oS ge Poa OO 


27 that some 200 American-built ships were being 
chartered for the duration of the war to Great Britain 
and several other United Nations. Eight ships, he 
said, had already been chartered to Norway, three 
to the Netherlands, two to Greece, and five to Brit- 
ain, the latter to get in addition fifteen or twenty a 
month for ten months. Although title to these ships 
is to remain in the United States government, it is 
apparently feared that the ships may stay in the 
hands of the recipients and threaten the predominant 
position which the United States is winning in mer- 
chant shipping as a result of war construction. 


The reasons for this arrangement, intended to in- 
sure the fullest utilization of United Nations re- 
sources, were explained briefly by Admiral Land in 
his July 27 statement, and more fully in a letter from 
President Roosevelt which Prime Minister Churchill 
read to the House of Commons on August 3. It was de- 
signed (1) to give effect to an agreement between 
the President and the Prime Minister, made shortly 
after Pearl Harbor, which provided that Britain 
would concentrate on the construction of war vessels 
while the United States became “the merchant ship- 
builder’’ for the two nations; and (2), as a result of 
this division of war tasks, to insure full use of the 
surplus of British merchant seamen—and apparently 
Norwegian, Dutch and Greek as well—at a time 
when American construction of ships is running 
ahead of our ability to man them. 


NO THREAT TO U.S. SHIPPING. Even assum- 
ing that in the interests of post-war Allied unity it 
will prove unwise for the United States to ask for re- 
turn of these ships, it is difficult to find any real basis 
for concern about their disposition. The great ma- 
jority of ships now being built in this country are 
Liberty ships—vessels which are generally consid- 
ered too slow and inefficient for post-war competi- 
tion; the faster Victory ships will not be delivered 
until early in 1944, and then only in limited num- 
bers. This means that, at most, only a small propor- 


ee 
a: 


tion of the number chartered to Britain during the 
next ten months will be Victory ships. 

For the United States to attempt to gain a head 
start in the post-war shipping race simply by an over. 
whelming superiority in slow-going Liberty ships 
would not be sound policy from either an economic 
or political point of view. Members of the United 
Nations which have suffered great shipping losses 
and to which the carrying trade is of vital importang 
—Britain, Norway and Greece, for example—would 
soon overcome this American advantage with the aid 
of lower construction and operation costs, unles 
the United States embarked on a heavy subsidy pro. 
gram. Not only would the cost of such a program be 
staggering, but it might bring retaliation in such 
fields as commercial aviation, where the United 
States can compete on an economic basis. Moreover, 
it would almost certainly result in a revival and ex. 
tension of pre-war trade barriers and excessive eco- 
nomic nationalism. 

The growing interest in the future of American 
shipping was indicated on August 7 when it was an 
nounced that the Maritime Commission and the War 
Shipping Administration had formed a_post-wat 
planning commission, and the State Department an 
International Shipping Committee. The former, it is 
reported, will study ways and means of gaining the 
maximum share of the world’s shipping, while the 
latter looks toward an international understanding 
which would form part of the whole post-war settle. 
ment. It is to be hoped that these two aims can be 
reconciled so that the United States will avoid, on 
the one hand, the danger of again being without a 
merchant marine sufficient to guarantee its secutity 
—even if this demands the use of subsidies—and, on 
the other, the temptation to gain artificial domina- 
tion of the world’s waterways. In shipping, as in 
many other fields, both political and economic, n2- 
tional self-interest appears to lie in the direction of 
international cooperation. 

Howarp P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Chile: A Geographic Extravaganza, by Benjamin Suber- 
caseaux. New York, Macmillan, 1943. $3.00 
A Chilean deftly conducts the stranger through his 
many-sided country, not ignoring its problems or dark 
aspects but nevertheless giving an inviting picture. 


Chile, by Erna Fergusson. New York, Knopf, 1943. $3.50 

Sympathetic and informed survey of the country by an 
American visitor. Leaves somewhat the same impression 
of Chile as Subercaseaux’s book, although lacking his 
touch of native familiarity. 


Wrath of the Eagles, by Frederick Heydenau. New York, 
Dutton, 1943. $2.50 


Mihailovich and the Chetnik campaigns presented in the 
form of a novel. Interesting, and sounds authentic. 


War Eagles, by J. S. Childers. New York, Appleton, 1943. 
$3.75 


This is the story of the famous Eagle Squadron of the 
RAF. With the aid of records of the British Air Ministry 
and countless interviews with the pilots themselves, the 
author, a Colonel in the U.S. Army Air Forces, has writte 
a thrilling account of aerial warfare. 


The Spanish Labyrinth, by Gerald Brenan. New York, 
Macmillan, 1943. $3.50 


An excellent and remarkably full study of the little 
known Spanish nation in the half-century before the civi 
war. Only a chapter or so is devoted to the war itself, but 
the whole book supplies a much-needed background to this 
complex and tragic event. 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


prec 
and Sicil; 
peoples as 
Europe. / 

rtunity 
and devel 
ference ca 
reassuring 


HEAR’ 
ing event: 
August 2: 
Soong, w 
Far Easte: 
velt-Chur 
merely in: 
This step 
are being 
China’s w 
as a parti: 
China has 
the fact th 
cussing th 
stance to | 
tinue full 
and China 

This ce 
tions was 
when it v 
ans and / 
15, thus o 
and naval 
Kiska—w 
for heavy 
of Param 
shorter di: 
flew on A 
found trip 
Also inclu 


