| a) ee 





Fe 








TY 


7 
< 


a. ml 
Ann Arbor, 


nad 
ve 


v4 


oS toe 


“ 
_ 


ne. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
peau Fiotop aid 


a sai De 
ity offichigan Library 


“wea tf 4 
v S$ 
oY 


Wich. 5 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXIII, No. 5 


NoveMBER 19, 1943 





—_—_—_ 


LEBANESE CRISIS CREATES NEW RIFT IN FRENCH-ALLIED RELATIONS 


— at first appeared to be two totally unre- 
lated events— the reorganization of the French 
Committee of National Liberation in Algiers on 
November 9 and the arrest of Lebanese officials by 
the French troops in Beirut two days later—seem 
upon closer inspection to have common roots in the 
desire of French leaders to maintain and strengthen 
their political position before final blows are struck 
against Germany. The resignation of General Giraud 
from his position of co-President of the Committee 
on November 9 marked the growth of General de 
Gaulle’s influence, which has been in the ascendant 
since his arrival in Algiers last May. 

One factor in de Gaulle’s success as a popular 
leader has undoubtedly been his nationalist stand, 
which Britain and the United States unwittingly 
encouraged last summer when they delayed nearly 
three months in recognizing the French Committee. 
More recently, the omission of the French Committee 
from the Moscow discussions has caused de Gaulle 
to voice additional protests against the Allies. Al- 
though French resentment at the Anglo-American 
attitude toward the Committee may have been justi- 
fed, de Gaulle’s present criticism of the Moscow 
Conference seems unfounded, for the participants in 
the Moscow meeting are bearing great and immedi- 


) ate responsibilities of a kind the French Committee 


is incapable of fulfilling. Moreover, the Tri-Power 
Agreement on Italy, which provides for consultation 
with the French Committee, foreshadows similar co- 
operation with French authorities when the German 
case is considered. 

Important as the changes in the French Committee 
are as a sign of de Gaulle’s increased strength, they 
are even more significant as an indication that the 
Committee is attempting to assure itself a leading 
position in liberated France. By appointing four new 
Commissioners who are direct representatives of the 
fesistance movements in metropolitan France, de 


Gaulle’ strengthened the Committee's claims*to “the*°"™"—""~ 


custodianship of French affairs during the important 
transition period that will extend from the moment 
Allied troops land in France to the day elections are 
held for ascertaining the will of the French people. 
Whether Britain, the United States and the Soviet 
Union will agree to the French Committee’s playing 
this role is one of the important pre-invasion issues 
now confronting the Allies. 

LEBANON AND FRENCH PROMISES. The 
current disturbances in Lebanon and their repercus- 
sions throughout the Middle East are also compli- 
cating French-Allied relations. During the latter half 
of the nineteenth century, Lebanon was the strong- 
hold of French authority and influence in the entire 
Middle East, for the predominantly Christian popula- 
tion—then under Turkish rule—frequently relied on 
French protection. When, however, France enlarged 
Lebanon in 1920 to increase French authority in this 
new mandate, the opposite effect was produced. Great- 
er Lebanon, which includes many Moslems, opposed 
this mandate and frequently joined neighboring Syria 
in accusing France of dividing the region to prevent 
the’ development of national unity and achievement 
of ultimate independence. As a result of this oppo- 
sition, which was intensified after Britain granted in- 
dependence to Egypt in 1936 in response to nation- 
alist pressure there, France promised both Lebanon 
and Syria their independence by 1939. Fulfillment of 
this pledge was deferred when World War II broke 
out and Axis propaganda seized the opportunity to 
promote anti-French feeling and prepare the way for 
Axis control of the Middle East. Under these condi- 
tions, the British and the Free French decided to 
wrest Lebanon and Syria from Vichy control, and 
General George Catroux proceeded to win the Syrians 
and Lebanese over to the Allies by proclaiming the 
independence and sovereignty of their states. 

Accordingly, the Lebanese held elections, formed 























a new government, and began the process of amend- 
ing the constitution—one of the important preroga- 
tives of sovereignty—to exclude non-Lebanese author- 
ities and to make Arabic the only official language. 
Now, however, the French declare that the man- 
date can be terminated only by the League and con- 
tend that the agreement of 1936 must meanwhile be 
observed. To the Lebanese these are not likely to be 
persuasive arguments, particularly in view of the loss 
of life and injuries to religious sensibilities they have 
incurred during the past week. The loss of prestige 
the French have suffered by their resort to force is 
attested by the fact that the Archbishop of the 
Maronites — traditionally the staunchest supporters 
of French intervention in Lebanon — joined with 
Moslem leaders on November 11 against French 
“insults” to the Lebanese. 


BRITISH-FRENCH RIVALRY. Britain's imme- 
diate interest in the French-Lebanese situation springs 
not only from the support it gave the proclamation 
of independence in 1941 but from the use British 
forces are making of the Middle East as a military 
base. More far-reaching, however, are Britain’s own 
imperial interests, for Syria and Lebanon are neigh- 
bors of Iran, Iraq, Palestine and Egypt, where Britain 
is eager to keep the good will of the Arab popula- 
tions. Because of this British stake in the Middle 
East and the age-old rivalry that has existed between 
Britain and France in this area, the French naturally 
view British protests with suspicion. In this connec- 


LATIN AMERICAN LABOR PLANS FOR THE FUTURE 


Mexico City.—Early this month Sefior Vicente 
Lombardo Toledano, leader of Latin America’s trade 
union federation—Confederacién de Trabajadores de 
la América Latina (CTAL), which recently com- 
pleted its fifth year of existence and claims to repre- 
sent 4,650,000 organized workers in 14 Latin Amer- 
ican countries—publicly confirmed the Confedera- 
tion’s decision to call an Inter-American Economic 
Conference in 1944 in Mexico City to study the war 
and post-war economic problems of the Western 
Hemisphere. The main task of the Conference will 
be to set up a coordinated economic plan to increase 
each Latin American country’s contribution to the 
war effort, and to convert to peacetime work with 
the least possible dislocation. According to Lombardo 
Toledano, the application of a pan-American eco- 
nomic plan is indispensable to the retention or im- 
provement of already existing democratic rights in 
Latin America. Only a working plan, he warns, can 
prevent the present economic crisis from becoming 
a catastrophe, and at the same time enable the Latin 
American nations to contribute their share to the re- 
habilitation of war-ravaged areas of the Old World. 

LAYING THE GROUNDWORK. The story of 
the Inter-American Economic Conference goes back to 


PageTwo 











tion, the French undoubtedly recall that it was opi 
with great reluctance that Britain agreed that Syj 
and Lebanon should become French mandates at ¢f 
close of World War I and fear that, if these stat 
become independent, they will inevitably lean » 
ward Britain as the strongest power in the Mid 
East. In an effort to prevent this preponderant Britig 
influence from permanently undermining the pog 
tion of France in this area, the French may be & 
pected to oppose British intervention in Lebanon, 

PAN-ARAB ASPIRATIONS. The possibility thy 
the politically conscious Arabs of the entire Middk 
East may support the Lebanese is indicated by th 
protests Egypt, Iraq and Saudi Arabia have maj 
against the French action. The pan-Arab feeliry 
demonstrated in this crisis may be expected to infly 
ence future Allied decisions concerning the Midd 
East. That the United States will be concerned with 
these problems is clear from the strong protests th 
State Department made to the French Committe 
when the disorders broke out. 

The clashing interests in Lebanon, fortunately, & 
not now present the threat to the Allied war effor 
that they would have two years ago. But some peti 
still exists and, for immediate military reasons as wel 
as the future peace settlement, the Lebanese shoul 
at once receive an inter-Allied guarantee of inde 
pendence to become effective as soon as the Middk 
East ceases to be a strategic base. 


WINIFRED N. HApDsEL 










November 1941, when Lombardo Toledano submit 
ted to the first Council of the CTAL, assembled a 
Mexico City, a comprehensive report on economi 
and social conditions in Latin America, stressing the 
necessity of a planned war economy in all of thes 
countries, and an increase in the exchange of goods 
between them. On the basis of this preliminary 


port, the CTAL Council urged its affiliates to prepatt | 


for the next meeting studies dealing with reorganiz- 
tion of the national economy in the various Latin 
American countries. Delegates to the second Counel 
meeting, held at Havana, Cuba, in July 1943, sub 


mitted to the Confederation substantiated reports 00\ 


the economic situation in and the essential needs of 
their respective countries. Although various political 
questions were discussed, the Havana meeting dealt 
principally with economic problems, and with plans 
for the 1944 conference. 

The Inter-American Economic Conference will b 
called together by the CTAL, and invitations to pat 
ticipate in the discussions will go not only to affiliated 
federations, but to all American governments and t0 
the most important industrial and agricultural em 
ployers’ organizations. The conference will thus fol 
low the pattern established by the International Labo 





\\ 


Offic 
ences 
ermm 
repre 
begu 
num 
ence. 
ment 




















bmit. 
ed at 
omic 
g the 
these 


y re 


pate 


niza- 
Latin 
uncil 

sub- 
ts On 
ds of 
itical 
dealt 
plans 


Ll be 


pat 
iated 
nd to 


fol: 
abot 

















—_ ———— 


Office of the League of Nations for its world confer- 
ences. According to CTAL officers, some of the gov- 
ernments so far approached have promised to send 
representatives. Since preliminary work has only just 
begun, it is too early to know what attitude the greater 
number of governments will take toward the confer- 
ence. It is expected, however, that definite commit- 
ments to attend will be on hand by the end of the year. 


SUGGESTED ECONOMIC REFORMS. Seiior 
Lombardo Toledano recently described the general 
goals of the conference, which will serve as a basis 
for discussion at the forthcoming meeting, as fol- 
lows: raising the Latin American living standard; 
spurring technical progress; mechanizing agriculture; 
opening up new fields of production; and eliminat- 
ing wasteful methods. Much bolder suggestions will 
probably be put forward later, and the direction they 
may take can be at least partially inferred from the 
minimum national economic plan adopted by one of 
the leading CTAL afhliates—Confederacién de Tra- 
bajadores Mexicanos (CTM). This body is still 
strongly influenced by Lombardo Toledano, who an- 
nounced the plan on August 29, 1943 during a speech 
delivered in the main square of Mexico City. 


Besides calling for immediate measures to improve 
living conditions in Mexico during the war, the CTM 
program also advocates the introduction of such 
post-war economic measures as government control 
over foreign trade to encourage imports of machinery 
and other commodities needed for improvement in 
the standard of living of the masses, to curb luxury 
imports, and to prevent the export of products need- 
ed at home; maintenance after the war of price con- 
trol measures, notably on staple foods and other 
articles indispensable to life and work; lowering of 
all agricultural rents to a maximum of 10 per cent 
of declared land value; and distribution at the lowest 
possible cost, either by government or other non- 
profit agencies, of all essential commodities, with a 
view to eliminating speculation and undue profits 
on essential goods. 

The plan of the Mexican Workers Federation 
(CTM) is probably the most radical of those now 
being prepared by workers’ organizations all over 
Latin America. Considering Mexico's leading role in 
the labor field, it would not be surprising if the CTM 
plan were used as a model for the programs which 
the national delegations will submit to the 1944 con- 
ference. It remains to be seen, however, what kind 
of reception these suggestions will meet with at the 
hands of the government and non-worker delegates. 


Page Three 














Opposition from these groups to any far-reaching 
changes might well prevent the meeting from laying 
the basis for social progress—as was, unfortunately, 
only too often the case with the deliberations of the 
International Labor Conferences. 


ERNEST S. HEDIGER 





Mrs. Dean is attending the first session of the 
Council of the United Nations Relief and Rehabili- 
tation Administration which opened in Atlantic City 
on November 10. She will resume her contributions 
to the ForEIGN PoLicy BULLETIN at the close of 
the Council session. 





The Amazon: The Life Story of A Mighty River, by Caryl 
P. Haskins. Garden City, Doubleday, Doran, 1943. $4.00 
The story of the river is told by discussing the six coun- 

tries in its basin, historically, geographically and politically. 

Our Army Today, by Kendall Banning. New York, Funk 
and Wagnalls, 1942. $2.50 
Useful, entertainingly written explanation of the army 

for the layman. 


A Social Psychology of War and Peace, by Mark A. May. 
New Haven, Yale University Press, 1943. $2.75 


Elucidates the author’s theory that man’s environment 
brings about his attitude toward peace or war, rather 
than any factors inherent in human nature. 


ASS SSS SSS 


Christmas Gifts 


As another Christmas approaches, we remind 
FPA members and subscribers to give friends a 
membership in the Association or a Headline 
Series subscription. In the critical year ahead, 
your gift will be read, re-read, and shared as a 
living record of the war and the emerging post- 


war world. 


REGULAR MEMBERSHIP*...... . $5.00 
ASSOCIATE MEMBERSHIP* (open only 


to teachers, full-time students, librarians, 
social workers and the clergy) . ... - $3.00 


SPECIAL HEADLINE SERIES SUB- 
SCRIPTION (10 issues) ....... . $2.00 


*Includes weekly Foreign Policy Bulletin and 
Headline Series. 


If you act promptly, we shall do our part to see 
that your Christmas gifts and announcement 
cards are taken care of in good time. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 5, NoveMBER 19, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Verna Micue.es Dzan, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


GB 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter bss 














ATLANTIC City, Nov. 14.—A world coalition for 
peace is being fashioned in Atlantic City, where the 
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Adminis- 
tration opened its first Council session on November 
10. At the Moscow Conference the four great pow- 
ers—Britain, Russia, China and the United States— 
joined forces to complete the war and map post-war 
organization. Atlantic City brings together 44 coun- 
tries to help lay the economic and social foundations 
of peace. The business of these nations is to devise 
a formula for supplying, transporting and distribut- 
ing the goods that will be needed by the liberated 
countries; to find homes for 30,000,000 displaced 
persons; and to finance this gigantic task. 

ONE FOR ALL, ALL FOR ONE. The agreement 
creating UNRRA was signed in the White House 
on November 9 by representatives of 44 countries— 
33 United Nations, 10 associated powers, and 
the French Committee of National Liberation. Pres- 
ident Roosevelt, signing for the United States, de- 
clared that the members of UNRRA “mean busi- 
ness.’’ When the Council meeting opened in Atlantic 
City on November 10 the delegates, in their formal 
speeches, stressed the need for speed and action. 
Assistant Secretary of State Dean Acheson, Chairman 
of the Council, said that UNRRA, whose headquar- 
ters are to be in Washington, would be ready ‘“‘to 
roll” by the end of winter. 

The political philosophy that inspires plans for 
UNRRA is that the world is a unit, each section of 
which is responsible for the well-being of all. Her- 
bert H. Lehman, former Governor of New York, 
who on November 11 was unanimously elected Di- 
rector General of UNRRA, said the organization's 
cardinal principle should be to help people help 
themselves. A Tory M.P., Col. John J. Llewellin, 
British delegate who has just been appointed Minis- 
ter for Food, synthesized UNRRA philosophy in the 
Marxian quotation: “From each according to his 
means; to each according to his needs.” 

With respect to needs, Sir Frederick Leith-Ross of 
Great Britain, presented to the Council the report of 
the Inter-Allied Committee on Postwar Require- 
ments, of which he has been chairman from its incep- 
tion on September 24, 1941. This report states that 
the nine European occupied countries—Belgium, Lux- 
emburg, Czechoslovakia, France, Greece, the Neth- 
erlands, Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia—will need 
45,855,000 metric tons of imports during the first 
six months after their liberation. To the needs of 


these nine countries must be added the unknown re. 
quirements of the Soviet Union, Asia, probably Den. 
mark, and perhaps the enemy countries. Directo; 
General Lehman said UNRRA would aim at supple. 
menting the diets of liberated peoples to provide each 
person with 2,000 calories a day. The Council was 
told by delegates that the Polish diet now is 800 cal. 
ories daily, that of Jews in Poland 400, and that of 
Belgians 1200 to 1300. 


WHERE ARE THE SUPPLIES? The means of 
supply are controlled mainly by the United States, 
the British Commonwealth of Nations, and the Brit. 
ish Empire, and their supply policy at the present 
time is governed above all by war requirements. 
Leith-Ross cautioned the Council that so long “as 
war operations continue, the program of relief and 
rehabilitation must be subject to the exigencies of the 
general war situation.” The spokesmen for the small. 
er countries at Atlantic City admit the need for 
giving war supplies first priority, but wonder whether 
UNRRA will be represented before the Combined 
Boards in Washington which control international 
movements of supplies. The establishment of 
UNRRA provides an opportunity for the govern. 
ments of the United Nations to overhaul their war 
time intergovernmental economic machinery, which 
now consists of semi-autonomous boards and agencies 
only loosely held together and, until now, dominated 
by Britain and the United States. 

These two countries, together with Russia and 
China, compose the Central Committee of the 
UNRRA Council, which is empowered to make de- 
cisions between Council sessions, subject to review 
and veto by the Council. UNRRA itself developed 
out of the Inter-Allied Committee—which is to be 
replaced by the UNRRA Regional Committee for 
Europe—and the Office of Foreign Relief and Re 
habilitation Operations, established by President 
Roosevelt on November 22, 1942 with Herbert Leh- 
man as its Director. UNRRA Director General Leb 
man encouraged the smaller countries at the Coun- 
cil meeting by declaring in his speech of November 
11: “I shall act as a representative of all the member 
governments, neither seeking nor accepting instruc 
tions from any individual government.” It is already 
clear that the extent to which Governor Lehman will 
succeed in carrying out the difficult task assigned to 
him will depend on the degree of cooperation he 
obtains from the governments represented on the 
Council. BLAIR BOLLES 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 





I 


— 
VoL. X 
———— 


EVEI 


M4 
ing a 
bly's 2 
mulga 
the w: 
Chief 
Gaull: 
tivene 
held I 
the cc 
who, | 
from 
that t 
is tryi 
FR 
His e 
Vichy 
Franc 
not b 
as Av 
paper 
on th 
Nazi- 
scape 
escap 
that 
ment 
clude 
Men 
the s 
Pé 
stitut 
unde 
of re 
1940 
comr 


occu 
the | 





