









































SP RP 42S 


nce 


ent 
his 
nen 
r of 


pive 
Of 4 


PBRIGDICAL ROOM 
@ENBRAL LIBRAR’ 
UNIV. OF MICH 


Ann Arbor, Nich. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


ohm webat 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





You. XXIV, No. 16 


Fmpruary 2, 1945 





we 


HE rapid progress of Russian armies in eastern 
Germany poses with new urgency the question 
of what the United Nations plan to do about the 
Reich following unconditional surrender—a ques- 
tion which will undoubtedly be at the top of the 
agenda of the Big Three conference. The European 
Advisory Commission set up by the Moscow Declara- 
tion of October 30, 1943 has been studying various 
aspects of the German problem in London for over 
ayear, but its conclusions have not been made public. 
While it is certainly premature to figure, as some 
people are doing, on the approximate length of time 
it may take the Russians to capture Berlin, the fact 
temains that the future of Germany is no longer an 
academic question. 


To what extent is it possible to say, in the absence 
of official information, that agreement about the 
future of Germany exists among the United States, 
Britain and Russia? There are five main issues to 
consider: territorial settlement; economic structure; 
feparation; post-war treatment of the German 
people; and international organization for security. 


1. TERRITORIAL SETTLEMENT. Unofficial opinion 
in the United States has on the whole opposed parti- 
tion of Germany, with the notable exception of 
former Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles 
who, in The Time for Decision, advocates the divi- 
sion of Germany into three parts. In Britain, too, 
most organs of opinion have not favored partition, 
and the London Economist definitely came out 
against it on August 12, 1944, on the ground that 
a Carthaginian peace “would raise to a maximum 
the Germans’ desire for revenge and reduce to a 
Minimum the British and American willingness to 
uphold the settlement.” The Soviet government, 
however, in its statement of January 20, 1944 con- 
cerning settlement of the controversy over eastern 
Poland on the basis of the Curzon Line, proposed 
that Poland should take, in compensation, certain 








WHAT KIND OF AGREEMENT WILL BIG THREE REACH ON GERMANY? 


German territories extending to the Oder River, in- 
cluding East Prussia and Upper Silesia, and Russia 
is reported to want German territory on the Baltic, 
including Koenigsberg. Prime Minister Churchill, 
in his address to the House of Commons on Decem- 
ber 15, 1944 said that the Poles are free, so far as 
Russia and Britain are concerned, “to extend their 
territories at the expense of Germany to the west,” 
having previously stated that the Atlantic Charter, 
which bars territorial aggrandizement, does not ap- 
ply to Germany. 


In the West, General deGaulle has demanded 
that the important industrial regions of the Rhine- 
land and the Ruhr be placed under the control of an 
international commission, of which France should 
be a member; and, more recently, that France should 
have access, possibly under international control, to 
the Westphalian coal fields. Dutch spokesmen have 
also declared that Germany should surrender border 
areas to Holland, in compensation for German flood- 
ing of Dutch areas—but this demand is not unani- 
mously supported in Dutch government circles. The 
United States, so far, has given no official indication 
of its views on the partition of Germany. It should 
be pointed out that the reported plans of the Euro- 
pean Advisory Commission for division of Germany 
into three areas, to be administered by the United 
States, Britain and Russia respectively, could con- 
ceivably become a precursor of partition if the Al- 
lied forces remain in occupation for a considerable 
period of time. This country is known to have a 
special interest in Austria, which is regarded as the 
dividing line between Russia and the Western pow- 
ers; and there has been some talk of uniting Austria 
with Bavaria. 

Many arguments can be advanced for and against 
the dismemberment of Germany. The guiding prin- 
ciple in reaching a decision should be neither thirst 
for revenge, nor sentimental consideration for the 





ae Ss ea 


Ne ar, 
A o 


a eee 
a 


a Oe ETE 


Cue 
~~ 








oR Ca gens TS —— 








feelings of the Germans (who will not regard with 
favor any peace signed following their defeat), but 
the need to reach a settlement that promises stabil- 
ity in Europe for the foreseeable future. The danger 
of the proposals made by Russia and France is that 
they have little chance of being supported for any 
length of time by the British and American people. 
Under the circumstances, the Poles and French could 
hold the German areas they want only with the mili- 
tary paper of Russia, to whom they would become 
indebted to an extent that could constitute a far 
more direct threat to their independence than any 
amount of Communist propaganda. No territorial 
settlement in Europe will last unless it can be backed 
by the full force of an international organization 
which, to be effective, would have to include Britain 
and the United States. 

2. ECONOMIC STRUCTURE. The only known pro- 
posal for “de-industrialization” of Germany is the 
so-called Morgenthau plan, which has not been pub- 
lished, and may have been misinterpreted in news- 
paper reports. Various unofficial suggestions have 
been made, however, to deprive Germany of the in- 
dustrial potential necessary for modern warfare by 
eliminating industries specifically devoted to war 
purposes—such as synthetic rubber and oil, alum- 
inum, and airplanes; and to establish international 
controls over the importation by Germany of raw 
materials it lacks, notably rubber, oil, copper, and so 
on. (The loss of East Prussia and Upper Silesia, and 
international control of the Ruhr and Westphalia 
would curtail Germany's coal resources, and would 
complicate its adaptation to a primarily agricultural 
life by depriving it of approximately 30 per cent of 
its rye, barley, potato and sugarbeet production.) 
The abolition of certain German industries that com- 
pete with those of Britain and the United States 
might find some support, especially among the Brit- 
ish, who look to export trade after the war to restore 
their depleted economic resources. It might be op- 
posed, on the one hand, by some businessmen in the 
Western world who, before the war, had established 
close relations with German industries, either 
through cartels or other arrangements; and, on the 
other, by the Russians, who have stated on occasion 
that the Germans must replace the tools and machin- 
ery they destroyed in Russia. The future of Ger- 
many's economic structure, in this respect, is closely 
linked to the question of reparation. 


3. REPARATION. The British and Americans, re- 
calling the innumerable difficulties of collecting repa- 
ration from Germany after World War I, do not 
appear eager to repeat the experience. The nations 
of Europe conquered by Hitler would certainly bene- 
fit by any reparation in kind the Germans could make 
for what they looted and destroyed, but so far most 
of them are disinclined to seek such reparation— 


Page Twe = 








——— 
ee 





—_———_. 
—_——— 





partly because they fear that large imports from 
Gemany would lead to unemployment among their 
own workers, partly because they realize that, if 
Germany is to supply such reparation, its industries 
will have to be kept running, and perhaps even re. 
built, by the Allies, to the immediate advantage of 
the Germans. The Russians, as indicated above, may 
take a different view. But the chief emphasis of the 
Russians has been on reparation not in money or 
kind, but in labor and technical skill. Moscow has 
suggested that German workers and engineers should 
be set at the task of rebuilding the devastated areas 
of Russia, and have already sent Rumanians of Ger. 
man origin to work in those areas. 


This proposal has shocked many Westerners, who 
fear that it would create slave labor. If it is accepted, 
it must be hoped that it will be applied under the 
supervision of an international commission. But the 
Russian proposal has three important points that 
deserve consideration. It would bring home to the 
Germans as no program of school re-education could 
possibly do, that war does not pay, and that what 
the Germans have destroyed they must literally re. 
pair. It would furnish employment to Germans who, 
as a result of disarmament and of any de-industrial- 
ization measures that may be adopted by the Allies, 
might otherwise be faced with mass unemployment. 
Finally, it would give Russia (and other devastated 
countries should they wish to follow Russia’s ex- 
ample) an opportunity to rebuild ahead of Ger. 
many. The last point has greater significance than is 
usually realized in this country. For the primary ob- 
jective of the Nazis was so to weaken the rest of 
Europe through systematic economic destruction and 
biologic restrictions as to insure that Germany, what- 
ever fate it might suffer on the battlefield, would 
remain the paramount power on the continent. 


4. TREATMENT OF GERMANS. Many people, hear 
ing of Russia’s proposal for the use of German labor, 
have jumped to the conclusion that the Russians 
would be more harsh toward the Germans than the 
British or Americans—and have even favored Rus 
sia’s prior entrance into Germany to insure a “harsh” 
peace which Britain and the United States might be 
too “soft” to impose. This is by no means a fore 
gone conclusion. The Soviet government has been 
very skillful in conveying to the Germans the ide 
that, once the Nazis have been shorn of power and 
Nazi “criminals” have been punished, the German 
people can expect decent treatment, and even retail 
the two prized institutions of private property and 
the army. In line with this policy the Free Germaf 
Committee, established in Moscow in the early days 
of the war, with prominent German officers at its 
head, including Marshal von Paulus, captured a 
Stalingrad, has urged German soldiers to revolt 
against the Nazis. This Committee has the makings, 


A ti 
wlitice 
Resear 
tains f 
issues | 
How te 

Five 

A de 
Welles 
separa 
Woodr 

New 

A cr 
tional 
the Pz 
trian. 
Milita 

Fra 

$3.5 

At : 
this v 
Rhine] 
valuab 











—_— 





should Moscow want to use it, of a provisional Ger- 
man government in the areas occupied by the Rus- 
jans. It is true that many Germans still fear Russia, 
ynd are haunted by dread of Communism. But the 
yestion may well be asked whether, by now, condi- 
jons of life in a city like Berlin, whose population 
has been driven to communal forms of housing and 
feeding to keep body and soul together, are essen- 
ally different from conditions in Russia. If Com- 
munism comes in Germany, it will have been fos- 
fed in the first place by the totalitarianism of the 
Nazis and by the war. 

Britain and the United States have no committees 
of Germans to set up in the areas they are hoping 
occupy, but General Eisenhower, in a series of 





yf- 
1 is 


of 
and 
nat: 


uld 


ear- 
Dor, 


ians 


Rus- 
rsh” 






lamations to the German people, has promised 


fibolition of Nazi laws and institutions, and guaran- 


of citizens’ rights. Until recently, there had also 


[rears to be agreement between Britain, the 


States and Russia concerning the punishment 
of Nazi ‘‘criminals.’’ A stalemate, however, has been 
ached by the United Nations War Crimes Com- 
nission in London. The resignation of its British 
chairman, Sir Cecil Hurst, and its American member, 
Herbert C. Pell, reveal that disagreement arose both 
sto the prospect of bringing Nazi leaders before an 
ternational court of justice, and the possibility of 
tying German officials for their treatment of Ger- 
man citizens, notably German Jews. Russia, which 


China’s Wartime Politics, 1937-1944, by Lawrence K. Ros- 

inger. Issued under the auspices of the International 
Secretariat, Institute of Pacific Relations: Princeton, 
Princeton University Press, 1944. $2.00 


A timely and compact survey of the current Chinese 
wlitical scene and its background, written by the FPA 
Nesearch Associate on the Far East. An appendix con- 
tins fourteen important documents relating to the main 
issues of Chinese politics. 


How to End the German Menace; A Political Proposal by 
Five Hollanders. New York, Querido, 1944. $1.25 


A detailed plan, similar to that proposed by Sumner 
Welles, for the partition of Germany into three or four 
“parate and independent states. 


Woodrow Wilson and the Lost Peace, by Thomas A. Bailey. 
New York, Macmillan, 1944. $3.00 


A critical analysis of the role Wilson played in interna- 
tional affairs from the outbreak of World War I through 
the Paris Peace Conference by a leading diplomatic his- 
torian. 


Military Occupation and the Rule of Law, by Ernst 
— New York, Oxford University Press, 1944. 
50 


At a time when the problem of occupation at the end of 
his war presses for solution, this careful study of the 


Rhineland occupation at the close of World War I is most 
valuable. 


— 





Page Three == 





is not a member of the Commission, has taken the 
view that the punishment of Nazi “criminals” is a 
matter not of law, but of military policy. 


5. INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR SECUR- 
iry. Whatever other measures may be taken by the 
United Nations concerning Germany, the funda- 
mental issue remains the need for an international 
organization that could effectively check aggression 
by Germany or any other nation. The United States, 
Britain and Russia, in spite of many divergences on 
specific European problems, agree on the need for 
such an organization, and have taken preliminary 
steps to establish it by accepting the Dumbarton 
Oaks proposals. In his speech of November 6 on the 
twenty-seventh anniversary of the Soviet revolution, 
Stalin said that these proposals ‘‘should be regarded 
as one of the clear indications of the stability of the 
front against Germany.” It is in the hope of main- 
taining this stability that President Roosevelt and 
Prime Minister Churchill have accepted many devel- 
opments in Europe with which they may not agree 
one hundred per cent—any more than Stalin feels 
one hundred per cent sure of the future aims of Brit- 
ain and the United States. One of the main tasks of 
the Big Three conference will be to reduce the still 
existing area of mistrust, and pave the way for con- 
certed action on Germany. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Durable Peace: A Study in American National Policy, by 
Ross J. S. Hoffman. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1944. $1.75 
An interesting attempt to define a foreign policy which 

expresses our national tradition, yet is definitely against 

isolation. ' 


Constitutional Provisions Concerning Social and Economie 
Policy. International Labour Office, Montreal, 1944. $5.00 
This collection of texts is designed to help countries 

which may revise their constitutions after the war. The 

introduction indicates objectives which will be important 
in formulating new constitutions. 


Poland and Russia: The Last Quarter Century, by Ann 
Su Cardwell. New York, Sheed and Ward, 1944. $2.75 


An American resident in Poland for many years, and 
wife of the general director of the Polish Y.M.C.A., the 
author presents a view favorable to Poland. 


Germany, A Short History, by George N. Shuster and 
Arnold Bergstraesser. New York, Norton, 1944. $2.75 
An attractively written survey of German history that 

takes a sympathetic attitude toward Germany’s. problems. 

In assigning responsibility for World War II the authors 

tend to hold Hitler rather than the German people respon- 

sible, arguing that the steps whereby he gained power 
were so masked that few Germans realized their import. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 16, Frsruary 2, 1945. 


m@ month for change of address on membership publications. 


Be 181 





Published weekly by the 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugt, Secretary; Vara MicHELes Daan, Editer. Entered as 
wond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leas 


Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Le Se SP 


een 








Washington News Letter |: 





—— 


MERIT NOT POLITICS SHOULD GOVERN DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENTS 


With the Army and Navy, the Foreign Service is 
one of the three shields of our national security, and 
Ambassadors should be chosen as carefully as gen- 
erals and admirals. The foreign relations of the 
United States suffer whenever Ambassadorships are 
carelessly awarded as political consolation prizes. 
This issue, an old one, is raised anew by President 
Roosevelt's letter of January 20 dismissing Jesse 
Jones as Secretary of Commerce, in which the Pres- 
ident said: “During the next few days I hope you 
will think about a new post—there are several am- 
bassadorships which are vacant—or about to be va- 
cated. I hope you will have a chance, if you think 
well of it, to speak to Ed [Stettinius}.’”” However 
able an Ambassador Mr. Jones might prove to be 
should he accept the offer, such a casual reference to 
important diplomatic assignments cannot but lower 
the Foreign Service in public estimation. 

CAREFUL CHOICE OF AMBASSADORS. The 
question is not whether politicians or ex-office hold- 
ers should be appointed Ambassadors, but whether 
anybody should be appointed to such a post for po- 
litical reasons unrelated to knowledge of foreign 
affairs. The practice of treating Ambassadorships as 
lame-duck havens robs the Foreign Service of the 
vigor, ability and es de corps which the develop- 
ment of an active foreign policy requires, and dis- 
courages the serious career diplomat in a subordinate 
position who sincerely wants to respect his chief of 
mission. At the same time, it encourages the public 
to take the frivolous view of foreign affairs depicted 
a few years ago in the play “Of Thee I Sing,” in 
which a well-intentioned bumbler makes amusing 
errors in his earnest attempt to fill the role of Am- 
bassador. The Administration needs broad popular 
support to achieve its objective of United States par- 
ticipation in an international security organization, 
and will be greatly hampered in obtaining it if it 
permits the conduct of our foreign relations to be- 
come a football of domestic politics. 

In selecting Ambassadors the President serves the 
country best by finding qualified men, wherever they 
may be, to perform a particular job, and by treating 
seriously the search for such men. In earlier days, 
when it was popularly supposed that the United 
States was impervious to events abroad, the use of 
Ambassadorships as political rewards may have been 
sound, for in few instances could the shortcomings 
of an envoy have harmed our interests. Thus Abra- 


BUY 


FOR VICTORY ° 


ham Lincoln without a qualm sent Simon Camerog 
to the Court of St. James, not to improve our rely 
tions with Britain, but to save Cameron from attac 
for his poor administration of the War Department 

CAREER MEN IN THE MAJORITY. Today, 
however, the President, Congress and the nai 
recognize the great international responsibilities of 
the United States. Few Americans argue that we ar 
invulnerable to events abroad or to the mistakes of 
our diplomats. Carelessness in the choice of diplo 
mats will henceforth be downright dangerous 
Recognition of the need for ability in diplomati 
posts has been developing throughout this century. 
In the time of Woodrow Wilson the Executive 
ceased to award the posts of Consul and Attaché om 
a political basis, and the Foreign Service Act of 1924 
has made possible the development of a stable career 
service under the administration of the State De 
partment. 

President Roosevelt currently relies on the career 
service to supply most of the Ambassadors and Min. 
isters, but good Ambassadors do not necessarily come 
from that service. In its early history, the United 
States had no men formally trained in international 
relations, but did have diplomats of native ability 
like Benjamin Franklin. Such “naturals” have ap 
peared in recent times as well. The late Dwight 
Morrow, a financier who was sent as Ambassador to 
Mexico in 1927, had a distinguished diplomatic rec. 
ord, although he did not reach his position through 


the Civil Service. John Winant, Ambassador 0, 


Great Britain, one of this country’s wartime diplo 
mats, was Governor of New Hampshire and Dire: 
tor of the International Labor Organization before 
his diplomatic appointment. In every case the Pres 
ident would be well advised to seek, first, among the 
career service to fill vacant Ministerial and Ambas 
sadorial posts. As a general rule, however, our high: 
est representatives abroad should at all times bk 
chosen on merit and, where distinguished public set 
vants like Jesse Jones or eminent private citizens aft 
chosen, such choice should be made not on the basis 
of paying political debts, but for reasons of special 
ability for the task at hand. But the President wil 
lack full freedom to choose the best possible met 
for all posts as long as the Ambassadorial salaty 
remains $17,500, for expenses of some of the mot 
important posts often exceed the pay and allowances 
BLAIR BOLLES 


UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 





19: 


\2| 


Ame 
alon 
clocl 
at tl 
the 


pine 
has 

all | 
libe: 


whi 
espe 





