


I 


iven 
dled 
hich 
area 


) 1 
and 
wide 
1 to 
Iraq 
ition 
and 
trac- 
num 
S as 
C—a 
lants 
pt, a 


East 
COn- 
vers, 
ually 
s. As 
from 
bora- 
n are 
ittees 
bora- 
Com- 
ntet’s 
' rests 
| sup- 
post- 
> will 
10ugh 
>grate 
only 
sport, 
id di- 


pment 


N, JR. 


F.P.A. 
| 25th 
e held 


:, Mac- 
-e-Nazi 


. tradi- 
coming 


143 














PERIODICAL RuTs 
GBMBRAL LIBRAR™ 
wrsty. OF WCu 





Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library OCT 
2 143 
University of Uichigan : 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 


FOREIGN POLICY 


316) 5) Boe Boy 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vout. XXII, No. 50 


Ocrosmr 1, 1948 





HUMAN WELFARE MUST BE FIRST CONCERN OF POST-WAR PLANNERS 


HE wave of strikes in Britain, the news about 

underground movements that filters in from con- 
quered countries, and many other straws in the wind 
indicate that, below the surface of the war, changes 
are germinating that are bound to affect the post- 
war period—what the anti-Fascist writer Ignazio 
Silone has described as “the seed beneath the snow.” 
These changes are not primarily concerned with the 
reshuffling of frontiers, the reorganization of colonial 
administration, or the redistribution of raw materials. 
They reach far deeper, into the inner hopes and fears 
of the men and women without whose support the 
war cannot be won—and the peace can be lost. 


HUMAN FACTOR IN PEACE-PLANNING. It 
is essential to understand this, because most post-war 
planners have a disturbing way of concocting disem- 
bodied schemes in which nothing, or hardly any- 
thing, is said about the human beings who would 
presumably be needed to make blueprinted machin- 
ery function. Throughout the centuries, war- and 
peace-makers have shown a striking disregard for the 
feelings and needs of the people whose destiny they 
undertake to settle. At national rallies and interna- 


_ tional gatherings much is said about mankind; but 


very little about man. Nor does the current preoccu- 
pation with ‘the common man” markedly alter this 
Situation, since the assumption is almost invariably 
made that it will be for the few “uncommon” leaders 
to shape his fate. 

Yet it is because the so-called common man-——who 
has no political or economic influence over his coun- 
try's policy except such as he can exercise by his vote 
in countries where votes are counted—is deeply per- 
plexed about the future that the feeling of change is 
in the air. If all that were necessary to stabilize the 
world were a decisive military victory on the part of 
the United Nations, the task would be relatively 
simple. But it is already clear that the closer we draw 
to victory, the greater will be the problems of adjust- 


ment we shall face, within nations as well as between 
nations. 


LITTLE EVIDENCE OF COMMUNISM. There 
is no indication as yet that these adjustments are 
motivated, in Britain or the conquered countries, by 
a pronounced predilection for revolution, or by wide- 
spread attachment to Communist ideas. On the con- 
trary, there is considerable evidence that renascent 
nationalism tends to mute political differences, rally- 
ing all groups, including Communists, in a national 
effort for liberation and recovery. If an upheaval 
inspired by extreme radicals were’ impending, it 
would be natural, if not necessarily desirable, 
for the Allies to be on guard against far-reaching 
changes that might cap war devastation with post- 
war anarchy. But the more the Allies display under- 
standing and sympathy for the desire for moderate 
change that is burgeoning on the continent, the more 
likely it is that the kind of revolution they fear may 
be avoided. 

This, however, is only the negative aspect of the 
picture. The positive aspect is that the Allies, for 
their own self-protection after the war, must nurture 
those forces in Europe which seek to improve and 
strengthen institutions that proved inadequate to 
meet the Nazi onslaught. For the conditions we shall 
find in the conquered countries once they are liber- 
ated may shock us far more than the outbreak of war. 
We shall find, with increasing horror, that it was by 
trying to break the spirit of man, by trying to destroy 
the inner values that make the individual something 
more than mere flesh and blood, that the Nazis hoped 
to conquer Europe and the world. It is only by re- 
storing the unassailability of the human spirit, by 
reaffirming the worth and integrity of the individual, 
that the United Nations can win ultimate victory in 


‘a wart which has assumed the proportions of a 


legendary struggle between Good and Evil. And 
this time the peacemakers have an unrivaled oppor- 





a 





——_— SSS Page Two 


tunity to demonstrate that the individual, who found 
no security against terrorism and death within the 
national state, may find it, in fact will have to find 
it if he is to survive, in nations integrated into the 
larger framework of international society. 

But the security of the individual cannot be meas- 
ured only in terms of freedom to practice religious 
beliefs or to cast a vote at given intervals. It must 
aiso be measured in terms of the opportunity he has 
tc exist with some degree of self-respect by working 
at a useful task for which he receives enough to main- 
tain a decent livelihood for himself and his family— 
or, as the British call it, the “Four Decencies” of 
housing, food, clothing and education. The Nazis 
broke the spirit of many of their victims by terrorism 
and deprivation of political and religious liberties. 
But unemployment, and such palliatives as the dole, 
have also broken the spirit of men and women who 
felt that they had no place in human society. 

It is the fear that another period of economic de- 
pression and personal frustration may succeed the 


BRITISH CABINET SHUFFLE MAINTAINS CONSERVATIVE-LABOR BALANCE 


Important Cabinet changes and the ebbing of a 
threatening tide of strikes provided the chief home- 
front news in the United Kingdom as the nation pre- 
pared last week to celebrate on September 26 the 
third anniversary of the Battle of Britain. Except for 
criticism from the left wing of the Labor party, 
Prime Minister Churchill's reshuffle of the Cabinet 
seems to have caused little political commotion, 
while the averting of a strike in a vital aircraft fac- 
tory and the possibility of an early settlement of the 
dispute in the Northumberland coal mines were wel- 
comed in all quarters. 

GOVERNMENT POLICY UNCHANGED. The 
Cabinet changes announced on September 24 in- 
volved several significant appointments: that of Sir 
John Anderson as Chancellor of the Exchequer to 
replace the late Sir Kingsley Wood, whose sudden 
death on September 20 led to the reshuffle; of Lord 
Beaverbrook as Lord Privy Seal; of Major Clement 
R. Attlee to succeed Sir John Anderson as Lord Presi- 
dent of the Council; of Viscount Cranborne, former 
Lord Privy Seal, as Secretary of State for Dominion 
Affairs; and of Richard K. Law, formerly Parlia- 





What role will Russia play in post-war Europe? 
For a survey of the questions preoccupying public 
opinion in the United States today, READ— 
THE U.S.S.R. AND POST-WAR EUROPE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


25c 


August 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 




















——— eT, 
ee 





war that casts its shadow over Britain and othe 
countries heroically resisting the Axis powers, and 
makes them wonder whether the fine promises of 
post-war planners may not evaporate like mist at 
dawn when hostilities are over. To say, as some are 
already saying that the readjustments necessary to dis. 
pel this fear may prove unduly costly, or technically 
impossible, is no longer an — answer, now 
that we have seen the miracles of economic and jp. 
dustrial adjustment that can be accomplished in time 
of war. Men and women who have found themselves 
urgently wanted to save their countries from aggres. 
sion will not easily accept the prospect of being un. 
wanted in a peacetime world. At this point, if it is 
reached, a revolt may take place. But it will be a re 
volt that could have been avoided, and a revolt for, 
not against, the kind of post-war order for which the 
United Nations aver they are fighting. 





VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The third in a series on the outlook for the future in Europe.) 


mentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, 
to the new post of Minister of State in the Foreign 
Office. 

These appointments do not suggest any marked 
change in the policy of the Churchill government. 
Certainly there has been no shift to the left such as | 
that anticipated when it was thought Herbert Morti- 
son might get the Exchequer post. Indeed, the same 
balance of Conservatives and Laborites—and of con- 
servative and liberal tendencies—seems to have been 
maintained. Sir John Anderson’s appointment in 
itself will appear to some as a tightening of Con 
servative control. Sir John, who now holds a post 
ordinarily second only to that of Prime Minister and 
will, unlike his predecessor, sit in the War Cabinet, 
is an independent conservative with strong backing 
from London financial interests. As Permanent Un 





der-Secretary of the Home Office, 1922-32, and Gor 
ernor of Bengal, 1932-37, he built up a reputation as | 
one of Britain’s ablest administrators, and has been / 
frequently used in recent months by Mr. Churchill 
as a trouble-shooter in interdepartmental tangles. 
His cautious presentation of the government's posi 
tion in the February debate on the Beveridge Report 
aroused a good deal of resentment in Liberal and 
Labor circles, but it may well be that the Prime Min 
ister has picked Sir John as the best man to make 
palatable the financial adjustments involved in the 
achievement of his ‘Four Year Plan” for domestic 
reconstruction. 

Lord Beaverbrook’s return to the Cabinet was ap 
parently unexpected in London. Although a personal 
friend of the Prime Minister, he has recently led 4 
vigorous second-front campaign against Mr. Churcr 





>. mi ti=-jti~im Im ipa, nme ee 





other 
5, and 


list at 
ne are 
to dis. 
nically 


nd in. 
n time 
nselves 
Ag pres. 
ng un 
if it is 
e a fe 
ot for, 
ich the 


)EAN 


uro pe.) 


INCE 
Affairs, 
Foreign 


marked 
rnment. 
such as 
> Morti- 
1e same 
of con- 
ve been 
nent if 
of Con- 
} a post 
ster and 
Cabinet, 
backing 
ent Un 
nd Gov 
tation as 
nas been 
“hurchill 
tangles. 
tS posi 
e Report 
eral and 
me Min 
to make 
d in the 
domestic 


| was ap 

personal 
tly led a 
. Churdy 





——— —aom 
a —— 


ill through the pages of his powerful Daily Express. 
Latest reports suggest that he is slated for a mission 
to Moscow, where he will add his weight to Foreign 
Secretary Eden’s in seeking an Anglo-American- 
Soviet agreement. If this proves to be the case, his 
appointment will be welcomed by the majority of the 
British people. Lord Cranborne’s resumption of the 
Dominions Office, which he will hold in conjunction 
with his position as government Leader in the House 
of Lords, will undoubtedly be widely approved both 
in Britain and the Dominions. His resignation along 
with Anthony Eden over Britain’s Italian policy in 
1938, and his post-war pronouncements during the 
past two years have given him a reputation as one of 
the leaders of the liberal wing of the Conservative 
patty. The promotion of Richard K. Law, also an 
opponent of Chamberlain's appeasement policy, will 
be seen in the same light, while the appointment of 
G. H. Hall as Law’s successor in the post of Parlia- 
mentary Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs will 
identify the Labor party more closely with the di- 
rection of British foreign policy. 


REASONS FOR LABOR UNREST. The labor 
troubles which have caused so much concern in 
Britain during the past few weeks have centered in 
three vital industries: aircraft, shipbuilding and coal 
mining. With the undiminished need for maximum 
output of planes and ships, and the new demands on 
British coal production as a result of the Italian sur- 





This Age of Conflict, 1914-1948, by Frank P. Chambers, 
Christina P. Grant and Charles C. Bayley. New York, 
Harcourt, Brace, 1943. $5.50 
A world history of the past thirty years that is notable 

for its comprehensiveness, sound interpretations and ac- 

curate information. 


Social Insurance and Allied Services (“The Beveridge Re- 
port”), by Sir William Beveridge. New York, Macmillan, 
1942. $1.00 
The American edition of what is probably the most sig- 

nificant document to come out of wartime Britain. The In- 

troduction contains Sir William’s basic principles and a 

summary of his scheme for freedom from want in Britain, 

while the remaining chapters include in detail the financial 
and administrative measures he considers necessary for the 
realization of social security. 


The War in Maps, by Francis Brown, Emil Herlin and 
Vaughn Gray. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1943. $2.00 
A revised and enlarged edition of an atlas of New York 

Times maps, accompanied by running commentary. 


The Fight for New Guinea, by Pat Robinson. New York, 
Random House, 1943. $2.00 


An interesting, journalistic account of General Mac- 
Arthur’s first offensive in New Guinea which culminated 
In the seizure of Gona and Buna. 


oo rvre==—_—_—_—_—_—_———_—_—_—_— 


render, strikes in these industries have caused 
concern in Parliament and among labor leaders. 
They have come just at the time when Ernest Bevin, 
Minister of Labor and National Service, is trying to 
mobilize every ounce of manpower by registering 
women up to the age of 50 and boys and girls of 16 
and 17 years of age for direction into war work 
whenever the need arises. This government pressure 
on the working population, which has steadily in- 
creased over the last four years, is undoubtedly one 
of the causes of labor unrest. But, in addition, it 
seems probable that two other influences are at work: 
first, removal of the danger of invasion without the 
compensating stimulus of a second front in Western 
Europe; and second, the lack of positive assurance 
that, when the war is ended, measures will be taken 
to prevent unemployment and poverty. 


Howarp P. WHIDDEN, JR. 





To F.P.A. Members: You have helped the For- 
eign Policy Association to reach its quarter-century 
milestone this year and we are grateful for your loyal 
support. May we enlist your further cooperation by 
asking each member to secure at least one new mem- 
ber in the next six weeks? Your help will greatly 
strengthen the organization at a time when its edu- 
cational work is vitally needed. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


The New World Guides to the Latin American Republics, 
Vol. II, edited by Earl Parker Hanson. New York, Duell, 
Sloan and Pearce, 1943. $2.50 


Not profound or scholarly, but an extremely usable pot- 
pourri, compiled under the sponsorship of the Office of the 
Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs. 


The Story of the Americas, by Leland Dewitt Baldwin. 
New York, Simon & Schuster, 1943. $3.50 
A notable attempt to embrace the whole history of two 
continents in a single volume. The result is both readable 
and sympathetic, though somewhat superficial and at vari- 
ous points inaccurate. 


India: A Bird’s-Eye View, by Sir Frederick Whyte. New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1943. $1.00 
A brief survey of the Indian situation from the official 
British point of view. Discusses the history of British rule, 
the Cripps mission and its aftermath, the Indian states, 
and the role of India in the war. 


Rio Grande to Cape Horn, by Carleton Beals. Boston, 
Houghton Mifflin, 1948. $3.50 
Well-known advocate of the Good Neighbor Policy re- 
alistically appraises the rivalries of the Latin American 
nations which make it difficult for the United States to be- 
friend all the republics simultaneously. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 50, Ocroper 1, 1943. 


Bw 81 











Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lust, Secretary; Vana Micuuies Dnan, Editer, Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 
oe month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter 








vttban, 


greb bangs 








Oct. 1.—An administrative order issued by Sec- 
retary of State Hull on August 27, in accordance with 
a Presidential decree of June 3, threatened to end 
Herbert H. Lehman's career in Washington and to 
jeopardize the progress he had made toward an inter- 
national plan for relief in the war-devastated areas. 
That order subordinated Governor Lehman’s Office 
of Foreign Relief and Rehabilitation Operations to a 
newly formed State Department bureau, the Office of 
Foreign Economic Coordination (OFEC). Two de- 
velopments during the past week saved former Gov- 
ernor Lehman, although it is not yet certain that they 
will assure adoption of a practical relief program of 
a size and character that will satisfy the basic needs 
of the lands conquered and starved by the Axis. 


WORLD RELIEF PLANNING. First, on Sep- 
tember 23 Secretary Hull disclosed that a new draft 
agreement for a United Nations Relief and Rehabili- 
tation Administration had been approved by the 
United States, Great Britain, the Soviet Union, and 
China, and had been submitted to the 29 other 
. United Nations, the 10 associated governments, and 
the French Committee of National Liberation. The 
original draft agreement had been submitted on 
June 10, and on June 28 the Dutch government 
handed to the State Department a note protesting 
features of the proposed Administration which, in 
the Netherlands view, gave too much power to the 
“Big Four’—the United States, Britain, Russia, 
China—and left the other governments out of policy- 
making. The revised draft represents an attempt to 
meet some of these objections, shared by other Allied 
governments in London. 

The second development was President Roose- 
velt’s announcement on September 25 that he had 
appointed Lehman his Special Assistant ‘for the pur- 
pose of perfecting plans for the meeting of represen- 
tatives of the United Nations on November 9,” when 
the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Ad- 
ministration (UNRRA) is to come into being. Relief 
after this war is to be distributed through the efforts 
of all the United Nations, and not by the United 
States alone. 

This White House post for Lehman was the most 
unexpected corollary of Mr. Roosevelt's order of Sep- 
tember 25 establishing the Office of Foreign Eco- 
nomic Administration with Leo Crowley at its head. 
OFEA is an amalgam of four agencies—Office of 
Lend-Lease Administration, Office of Economic War- 
fare, Office of Foreign Economic Coordination, and 





Office of Foreign Relief and Rehabilitation Oper 
tions. OFRRO and Lehman thus part company; but 
the President has advocated Lehman for the post of 
Director-General of UNRRA—so his functions age 
on the point of being expanded into the international 
sphere. 

President Roosevelt set up OFRRO in the State 
Department on December 4, 1942 and at the same 
time made Lehman its director. Almost immediately 
Lehman’s plans were scoffed at by some critics as 
“globaloney.” Neither the picture of human misery 
on a continental scale nor the thought that the United 
States would prosper little in a world of undernour- 
ished nations moved these critics. Within the State 
Department Lehman was irked by what he felt were 
restrictions upon his freedom of action, imposed 
despite his understanding that he was to be prac 
tically autonomous. Mr. Hull’s August 27 order 
caused Lehman apprehension lest his relief planning 
be junked altogether. His resignation at any moment 
during the past month would not have astonished 
the Capital. 


PROSPECTS UNCERTAIN. Even now, questions 
arise about the future of relief planning. Will Crow. 
ley’s OFEA support whatever Lehman advocates as 
the United States’ share in the work of the United 
Nations Relief Administration? Will the State De. 
partment support Crowley if he supports Lehman? 
Mr. Roosevelt's order creating the new Crowley 
agency and taking OFRRO and OFEC out of the 
State Department says that the Office of Foreign 
Economic Administration must. function “in com 
formity with the foreign policy of the United States 
as defined by the Secretary of State.” What that 
policy is the Secretary of State has not made clear. 
The President’s appointment of Lend-Lease Admin-| 
istrator Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., as Under Secretary } 
of State to succeed Sumner Welles may mean that) 
the State Department will develop a foreign policy| 
characterized by economic liberalism, which would 
implement the Lehman planning. In the past, how 
ever, Stettinius has given no indication of originality, 
and has closely followed the course set by the State) 
Department. 





BLAIR BOLLES 


News LETTER to the ForEIGN PoLicy BULLETIN, replacing 
our former Washington correspondent, John Elliott, now 4 
Major in the Army of the United States. Mr. Bolles has | 
served with the Washington Star since 1935, specializing in 
foreign and diplomatic news, and recently returned from @ 
three-month visit to Sweden (at the invitation of the Swedish 
government), Portugal and England.} 


{BLAIR BOLLES will contribute a weekly WaAsHINGTON | 


1918—TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE F.P.A.—1943 


