| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


GENERAL LIBRARY 


You. XIX, No. 33 JUNE 7, 1940 


, 


For a survey of Italy’s military and economic 


position, read: 


ITALY’S ROLE in the EUROPEAN CONFLICT 
by ROBERT GALE WOOLBERT 


25¢ 


May 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 


RIGDICAL ROOM of March 3, 1879. 


UNIV. OF MICH. 


General Library 


University of Uichigcan 


Ann Arbor, Michticanr 


ITALY GIRDS ITSELF FOR WAR 


A$ the Allies struggled to evacuate the remnants 
of their troops from Flanders and prepared 
for German attacks on Paris and London, attention 
was again focused on Italy, where far-reaching plans 
were expected to be announced at a meeting of the 
Council of Ministers on June 4. All visible signs— 
such as the mobilization of troops; the evacuation 
of industrial cities close to the Franco-Italian border; 
the suspension of sailings from Italian ports; the 
cancellation of permits to acquire foreign exchange 
(which may force termination of imports from 
the United States)—indicated the imminence of the 
decision Mussolini has repeatedly asserted he alone 
will make. This decision, which for weeks has been 
hanging over the heads of the Allies like a sword 
of Damocles, may itself be subject to the exigencies 
of the Nazi timetable. 


WHAT ITALY HOPES TO GAIN. At no time 
since the outbreak of the war was it possible that 
Italy might enter the conflict on the side of the 
Allies. In contrast to 1914, when Italy was friendly 
to Britain and had a great deal to ‘gain by the 
break-up of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Italy 
today can gain only through a defeat of the Allies, 
which would permit it to obtain those territories 
and advantages repeatedly demanded by the Fascist 
press: control of the Mediterranean and of its exits 
and entrances at Gibraltar and Suez, with Gibraltar 
nominally assigned to Spain; possession of Tunisia, 
Malta, Corsica, Nice, Savoy and Djibouti; and a 
share of other French and British colonies in Africa. 
Italy's choice thus lay between continuance of “non- 
belligerency” (which to the more militant Fascists 
appeared incompatible with the dynamic quality of 
Fascism), and outright military cooperation with 
Germany. Count Ciano, Italian Foreign Minister, 
has revealed that at Milan, in May 1939, and again 
at Salzburg, in August of that year, he had informed 
the Nazis that Italy needed three years to complete 


its military preparations, and was reluctant to be- 
come involved in war over Poland, where it claimed 
no interest. These considerations doubtless deter- 
mined Mussolini’s decision to proclaim “non-bel- 
ligerency” at the outbreak of war. In this rdle, Italy 
served Germany's purposes by immobilizing Allied 
forces on the Franco-Italian border, in the Eastern 
Mediterranean, and in Africa; and by channeling 
various overseas products into the Reich, among 
them probably lubricating oil from the United States, 
imports of which into Italy rose sharply after Sep- 
tember 1939. Italy's actual entrance into the war 
was therefore not necessary for Germany; and for 
Italy was advantageous only at a stage of the con- 
flict when total defeat of the Allies would appear 
so certain as to preclude the danger of a long war 
on Italy’s part. 

The series of rapid victories won by the Nazis in 
Poland, Norway, the Low Countries, and northern 
France convinced militant Fascists that Germany 
was bound to win, and that Italy should enter the 
war now, both to reap military glory at relatively 
little cost, and to share in the spoils of victory. 
These spoils, even if overshadowed by German 
domination of the entire European continent, would 
presumably be far in excess of any belated conces- 
sions the Allies may have proposed after the out- 
break of war last September. The Fascist govern- 
ment therefore rejected these concessions, refused to 
be won over by last-minute Allied offers to allevi- 
ate the effects of their blockade on Italian trade, 
and declined to be swayed by President Roosevelt's 
repeated messages. 


ITALY’S WAR POTENTIAL. In a short war 
Italy's military power, especially its fleet (with its 
large number of submarines and torpedo boats, 
adapted for war in narrow waters) and its air force 
(estimated at 4,000 to 6,400 planes, with a monthly 
production of 200 to 250), could inflict serious dam- 


ips 


—<——— 


- Page Two 


age on the Allies. Much has been said about the 
difficulties Italian troops would experience if they 
attempted to invade France across the Alps, but 
these difficulties would not prevent the Italian air 
force from wreaking damage on southern France, 
while the Nazis launch a new attack along the 
Somme-Aisne front. Italy’s lack of raw materials for 
war industries is also often stressed as a source of 
weakness. This factor would undoubtedly operate in 
a prolonged conflict, especially if the Allies succeed 
in closing Gibraltar and the Suez through which 
pass nearly 80 per cent of Italy's imports. Available 
trade statistics from non-Italian sources, however, 
would indicate that Italy, during the past two years, 
has been accumulating stocks of certain key raw ma- 
terials. Six million tons of oil were imported, largely 
from the United States, Rumania and Mexico, and 
drastic restrictions were imposed on private con- 
sumption; 19,745 tons of cotton were imported from 
the United States, India and Egypt in January 1940, 
as compared with 7,930 tons in January 1939; while 
shipments of rubber from the Dutch East Indies to 
Italy in January and February were three and a half 
times what they had been in the same months in 
1939. While Italy's pre-war imports of coal, which 
averaged 12 million tons a year (nearly 4 million 
overland from Germany, Austria, Poland and 
Czechoslovakia, and 8 million by sea), have been 
curtailed by the British blockade, Germany claims 
that it delivered nearly one million tons of coal to 
Italy in May, and intends to keep up deliveries. 

If Italy were cut off from overseas imports, it 
would be forced, in a long war, to seek supplies in 
the only area of Europe still untouched by war— 
the Balkans. Here the Rome-Berlin partners might 
become political and economic competitors. Italy 
has long claimed a sphere of influence in Yugoslavia 
(with a German minority of 500,000) and Bul- 
garia, and has a special interest in Greece, which 


i 
——— 


borders on its new colony of Albania and migh 
conceivably become a base for Allied operations ig 
the Eastern Mediterranean. Italy, often bidding 
against the Reich, has sought to import from Yugo. 
slavia and Rumania some of the raw materials } 
lacks, notably lumber, wheat and oil. Any increas 
in German imports of Balkan products would proy 
detrimental to Italy. Nor should the possibility be 
excluded that Italy, instead of striking at France 
might first assert its claims to territory in the Bal. 
kans, before a victorious Germany can turn in this 
direction. For if Germany wins the war, the Balkan 
countries would move into the orbit not of Italy 
which would be unable to protect them agains 
Hitler, but of Germany. 

This trend is already apparent in Hungary, where 
the moderate government of Count Teleki, hitherto 
hostile to Hungarian Nazism, anticipates a German 
victory and the need for cooperation with the Reich; 
and in Rumania, where the pro-Allied Foreign Min. 
ister, M. Gafencu, was suddenly dismissed by King 
Carol on June 1 and replaced by a German sympa. 
thizer, M. Gigurtu, just at the moment when Berlis 
was pressing its demand for increased deliveries of 
Rumanian oil. This pull toward Germany is bound 
to increase with every Nazi victory in the West; and, 
as it increases, the influence of both Italy and the 
Soviet Union in the Balkans may be expected tp 
diminish. The trade agreement which Yugoslavia 
concluded with the U.S.S.R. on May 11 apparently 
disappointed Belgrade, which had hoped Moscow 
might counteract German and Italian aspirations in 
this region. It is with these many and often conflict 
ing considerations in mind that Mussolini must 
reach a decision regarding military collaboration 
with Germany, whose victory might free Italy of 
Anglo-French dominance in the Mediterranean only 
to subject it to German dominance on the continent 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


DOMINIONS RUSH AID TO BRITAIN 


Because of the speed with which the Nazis have 
taken the Channel ports, it is possible that Germany 
may attempt to invade Great Britain within the next 
few weeks, before the Allies can reorganize their 
forces and fully mobilize their economic resources. 
A decision this summer would be especially desir- 
able for Germany, since it would be able to exert 
its maximum strength before the British Dominions, 
to say nothing of the United States, could intervene 
effectively. Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and 
South Africa can all provide the Allies—on an even 
larger scale than in the World War—with essential 
foodstuffs, raw materials, and many varieties of 
manufactured goods.* While these Dominions have 


*Cf. J. F. Green, ‘“The British Dominions at War,"’ Foreign Policy Reports, 
February 1, 1940. 


undertaken large-scale military and economic prep 
arations, they can hardly influence to any great e& 
tent the battle now in progress. Like Britain and 
France, the Dominions had planned for a long, slow 
war, not the Blitzkrieg that is now raging in Europe 
The Chamberlain government, displaying the same 
lack of imagination and energy that characterized 
its work in Britain itself, apparently failed to ex 
plain the urgency of the situation to the Empire and 
to place sufficiently large orders for airplanes and 
other supplies. 

While the military effort of the Dominions has 
been by no means negligible thus far, it has centered 
largely on training and preparing for a long wat. 
Canada already has about 92,000 men under arms, 
as well as many thousands training in the militia 


— 
——— 


jt has sen 
third divis 
to sending 
js attempt 
scheme, 0: 
training oO! 
Zealand t 
Egypt, an 
pilots to . 
training ul 
in Canada 
mobile fiel 


FINAN 
extent tha 
and forei; 
war effort 
serves of 
vestments 
change co 
especially 
products | 
stuffs in 
worth of 
ber, and « 
securities- 
dollars 
Canada, 
may thu 
foreign 1 
000 in 1 
Britain. 
financial 
of their 
is held ir 
payments 
$700,000 
fiscal yea 


EMPT 


| cal as we 


monwea. 
The Uni 
a vote oO 
lowed b 
and par 


| Over qu 


General 
Britain, 
ing troc 
tion—h: 
Malan— 
South A 
The Sn 


FOREIGN 
Headquarte 
Entered as 


Ss 


ee 
ea 


jt has sent two divisions to England, is training a 
third division, and recruiting a fourth. In addition 
to sending several airplane units overseas, Canada 
js attempting to speed up the Empire air training 
scheme, Originally designed to reach its maximum 
training of pilots in three years. Australia and New 
Zealand together have sent about 30,000 troops to 
Egypt, and both Dominions are sending airplane 
pilots to Europe, as well as expanding their own 
training units and participating in the Empire project 
in Canada. The Union of South Africa is organizing 
mobile field units, but limiting their service to Africa. 


FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES. To a far greater 
extent than in the World War, problems of finance 
and foreign exchange have hampered the Empire's 
war effort. Great Britain, reluctant to utilize its re- 
serves Of gold, foreign exchange and foreign in- 
vestments, has established strict import and ex- 
change controls. The Dominions have followed suit, 
especially as they buy airplanes and other American 
products in dollars while selling most of their food- 
stuffs in pounds. Canada repatriated $90,000,000 
worth of British-held government bonds last Octo- 
ber, and expects to repatriate additional British-held 
securities—at a rate of perhaps 250 to 300 million 
dollars annually—for the duration of the war. 
Canada, like the United States in the World War, 
may thus experience a gradual reduction in its 
foreign indebtedness, estimated at over $6,800,000,- 
000 in 1937, of which $2,700,000,000 was held in 
Britain. The war, moreover, places a tremendous 
financial burden on each of the Dominions because 
of their large public indebtedness, much of whith 
is held in London and requires large annual sterling 
payments. Canada, for example, has appropriated 
$700,000,000 for war purposes during the 1940-41 
fiscal year. 


EMPIRE PROBLEMS. The war has raised politi- 
cal as well as financial problems for the British Com- 
monwealth, particularly with regard to South Africa. 
The Union, which declared war on September 4 by 
a vote of 80 to 67 in the House of Assembly—fol- 
lowed by the resignation of Premier J.M.B. Hertzog 
and part of his Cabinet—has been seriously split 
over questions of war policy. Its present Premier, 
General Jan C. Smuts, has cooperated closely with 
Britain, although disclaiming any intention of send- 
ing troops outside Africa. Meanwhile, the opposi- 
tion—headed by General Hertzog and Dr. D. F. 
Malan—has continued to demand neutrality for 
South Africa and a republican form of government. 
The Smuts government has maintained its control 


Page Three 


of Parliament, while the opposition has probably 
lost some support since the invasion of the Nether- 
lands, as the Hertzog-Malan party is composed 
largely of Afrikander descendants of the original 
Dutch settlers. 

The possibility of a British defeat raises vital 
questions for the Empire as a whole, since a victori- 
ous Germany would undoubtedly demand the British 
fleet and many British colonies and bases. Inasmuch 
as the Dominions are largely dependent on Britain 
for defense and economic relations, their fate is 
closely bound up with. the European struggle. The 
defense of Canada, in particular, would rest with 
the United States, which has specifically included 
the Dominion within the Monroe Doctrine, and 
would presumably have to coordinate Canada’s 
military establishment and economy with its own. 
Australia and New Zealand, which depend on 
Singapore and British naval power for their protec- 
tion, would likewise have to count on American help. 

Our policy regarding these three Dominions 
would, therefore, be among the first and most 
important problems to arise if Germany should suc- 
cessfully invade and conquer Britain. We should 
have to decide immediately how far we would be 
willing to defend these countries against attack by 
Germany or some other great power. Whatever the 
outcome of the war, the United States will prob- 
ably cooperate more closely—both economically and 
politically—with the British Dominions. The recent 
exchange of Ministers between Australia and the 
United States, and President Roosevelt’s appoint- 
ment on May 27 of a ranking State Department of- 
ficial, Mr. J. Pierrepont Moffat, as Minister to Can- 
ada, are significant trends in this direction. 


JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 


France at War, by W. Somerset Maugham. New York, 
Doubleday, Doran, 1940. $1.00 


This well-written essay offers an interesting picture of 
the way in which the French people are meeting the strain 
of war. Mr. Maugham has set down his conception of 
French determination and French war aims, primarily for 
the benefit of his British compatriots, but Americans will 
find his impressions equally significant and highly readable. 


The Neutrality of the United States: Laws, Proclamations, 
Orders, Regulations, and Inter-American Declarations 
Applicable during the Present War in Europe. Boston, 
World Peace Foundation, 1940. 25 cents 


A convenient compilation of the documents, covering the 
period September 3—December 14, 1939. 


America Faces South, by T. R. Ybarra. New York, Dodd, 
Mead, 1939. $3.00 
Light reading for those familiar enough with Latin 
America not to be misled by a strong seasoning of mis- 
information. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 333 JuNE 7, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotuHy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHELES Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 


Se 181 


1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


i 
} 


1 
4 


IRE MAG ES PEASE NID 
o = Rabe « 


ws oh lo mer 8 


Washington News Letter 


vitbes, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JUNE 3.—The defense drive is proceeding with a 
momentum comparable only to the pace of military 
developments in Europe. With the emergency de- 
fense program involving a total of $3,297,009,000 
only two weeks old, the President last week re- 
quested Congress for supplementary appropriations 
which, it is estimated, will total about $1,375,000,- 
000. The only portion of the President's defense pro- 
gram which has encountered serious opposition is 


his request for authority to mobilize the National 
Guard. 


HEMISPHERIC PROBLEMS. The defense prob- 
lem of the United States has created overnight a new 
awareness of the Western Hemisphere. Washing- 
ton is acutely conscious of the growth of “fifth col- 
umn” activities in various Latin American countries 
and the vulnerability of these countries either to 
military attack or “economic seduction.’ Last week, 
in a belated effort to mend defenses, Argentina 
pushed forward a bill to supply the army with 400 
new planes and various other military equipment, 
while Uruguay made less ambitious plans to acquire 
planes and coast artillery, and Chile reopened ne- 
gotiations looking toward the purchase of two 
cruisers in the United States. Even assuming com- 
pletion of these programs, however, South American 
nations could offer little resistance to a relatively 
small, modern fighting force. All South America at 
present could put less than 300,000 army regulars, 
backed by a theoretical reserve force of about 1,- 
000,000 men, in the field, and the combined navies 
boast a half-dozen battleships, three modern cruisers, 
about 30 destroyers and 20 submarines. 

The fear of Nazi “Trojan horses” in Latin Amer- 
ica is by no means confined to the countries already 
mentioned. Brazil, despite official denials of a “fifth 
column” danger, is perhaps more vulnerable to Euro- 
pean attack than any of the major Latin American 
countries. Also, it contains the largest German 
population of any South American country, and its 
raw material resources have long been coveted by the 
Reich. For these as well as economic reasons, Brazil 
has for some time been a special object of financial 
and economic cooperation on the part of the United 
States, and it is probable that this cooperation has 
since extended into the political and military sphere. 
Mexico and Colombia, both areas of vital strategic 
importance to Western Hemispheric defense, have 
figured prominently in recent reports of spreading 


Nazi propaganda, and rumors of increased German 
activity have also emanated from Ecuador and 
Bolivia. 

Defense of the Western Hemisphere is as much 
an economic as a political problem. While Latiy 
America is dependent on the United States for mili. 
tary aid in the event of attack, this country in tum 
is vitally concerned with unimpeded access to Latin 
American raw materials. Should the European wa 
result in a Nazi victory, Latin America would be a 
logical objective for the intensified economic im. 
perialism of the Third Reich. The political philos 
ophy of the Nazi state is repugnant to the Latin 
American countries; but these countries could hardly 
reject German offers to purchase their raw materials 
and, as was amply demonstrated even before the 
war, there is a close link between business transac. 
tions with Germany and Nazi political penetration. 
Consequently, defense of the Americas involves eco- 
nomic support of Latin America by the United States 
in a manner which would effectively eliminate the 
possibility that Germany might use trade offers as 
a means of obtaining a political or military foothold 
in this hemisphere. 

While the development of a war economy would 
probably increase United States consumption of 
Latin American products to as much as 50 per cent 
of that area’s total exports, the problem would not 
be solved by this more or less automatic adjustment. 
There would still be a large Latin American export 
surplus composed of commodities ordinarily not 
purchased by the United States—such as cereals, 
cotton, various minerals and meat—which would he 
fair game for Nazi Germany. The United State 
may well be faced with the necessity of underwriting 
this Latin American export surplus, in order to con- 
trol its marketing abroad in such a way as to prevent 
or minimize the danger of political penetration. At 
the same time, the United States must be prepared 
to formulate a policy with respect to Allied invest 


ments in Latin America in the event of a German | 


victory. These investments have a potential impor 
tance for the defense of the Western Hemisphere 
at least equal to that of the British, French and 
Dutch colonies in this region. 

Howarp J. TRUEBLOOD 


World Without End, by Stoyan Pribichevich. New York, 
Reynal and Hitchcock, 1939. $3.50 
A fascinating interweaving of historic and political facts 
with vivid folk details which make the Balkans come alive. 
It is written with sympathetic understanding by one wh0 
loves his people. 


FORI 


An inter pr 


| 


S the 
me 
Premier 
was ente 
night. F 
withstan 
stretchin 
Italy’s 
as often 
lini’s pe 
indepen 
was beir 
man sot 
would 
the war 
air forc 
French 
Hitler b 
first obj 
a separ 
and cull 
In a 
ently st 
ranean, 
Italy's ; 
territor! 
sea, bec 
if it ha 
terized 
peoples 
cies.”” ] 
to wre: 
Corsica 
In ai 
lini pre 
Yugos! 
tilities 
tude. 7] 
War in 


