


ald 


hat 


ose 
ere 


the 
its 
‘ion 
> in 


tch, 


ttee 
eS0- 
ha 
nate 





PeRwi-~ . 


«or a 


GER AL Liweary 
. ae ee 


MPR «04, 
Entered as 2nd class matter 
Genera) Library 


Ur 4 4 
AVersity of Bichizan 


Ann Arbor, Wichiggn 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FORTIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 23 


MarcH 22, 1946 





_ hw undertow toward Big Three conflict that has 
been increasingly evident since the discovery of 
the atomic bomb, has gained dangerous momentum 
since Mr. Churchill's plea for a military alliance of 
the English-speaking countries, and Stalin’s denun- 
ciation of that speech in an interview given to Pravda 
on March 13. Ostensibly not one of the Big Three 
wants war. Yet at the rate at which their relations 
are deteriorating, war might again become a stark 
reality—not, perhaps, a head-on collision such as that 
between Germany and Russia, or between the United 
States and Japan in World War II but, what would 
be even more disastrous, a long-drawn out series of 
explosions all over the world, with little prospect of 
clear-cut victory for either side and with ultimate 
disaster for all, even if no atomic bombs are used. 


WOULD WAR WITH RUSSIA SOLVE 
WORLD PROBLEMS? Even assuming what now 
seems impossible, that the Western powers, com- 
bined in a coalition proposed by Mr. Churchill, could 
defeat Russia, would that resolve the problems that 
are causing the present crisis? Some people say it 
| would, because they believe that many of the world’s 
major maladjustments—labor unrest, threats of civil 
war, nationalist ferment in the colonies—are all di- 
rectly traceable to the influence of Russia, which 
they at the same time denounce for its backwardness. 
If a country described as backward can exercise such 
far-reaching influence of a disruptive character, then 
the rest of the world must be in a very weakened 
condition indeed. But can the weakness of the British 
Empire, the internal divisions in China, the growing 
demand of labor and minority groups for a wider 
measure of participation in the benefits of industrial 
progress all be laid at Russia’s door? Are they not, 
if we look at history in perspective, the natural con- 
comitants of mankind’s never-ending struggle for 





UNO OFFERS BEST MEANS OF RECONCILING BIG-THREE CONFLICTS * 


greater freedom and opportunity, which takes differ- 
ent forms in different areas of the world, according 
to the rate and character of their previous political, 
economic and social development? 


WESTERN POWERS MUST NOT EVADE RE- 
SPONSIBILITY. It is understandable that the rapid 
international changes now taking place should be 
particularly troubling to Britain, because the rise to 
world power of Russia, which has long challenged 
Britain’s influence, happens to coincide with the 
decline in power of the British Empire. But the mil- 
itary defeat of Russia would not allay the nationalist 
aspirations of Arabs and Indians, nor would it ease 
Britain’s political and economic tasks in India— 
where Americans, much more than Russians, have 
been critical of British methods. Nor would loss of 
power by Russia improve economic and social condi- 
tions in Spain, or the countries of Eastern Europe and 
the Balkans, or Latin America, whose peoples need 
no goading from Moscow to feel a desire for im- 
provement of their present condition. The United 
States and Britain have assumed responsibility, or 
had responsibility thrust upon them, in all areas of 
the world which they entered originally in search 
of economic or strategic advantages. They cannot 
evade their own obligations merely by blaming world 
unrest on Russia. 

This does not mean that every move Russia makes 
can or should be defended, for Russia’s conduct may 
be open to criticism in one instance, and understand- 
able or even desirable in another. What should be 
avoided is the indiscriminate condemnation of all 
Russian actions in world affairs such as seemed to 
inspire Mr. Churchill’s Fulton speech. Such indis- 
criminate condemnation can all too readily be inter- 
preted—and not by Stalin alone—as due less to con- 
cern for standards of international morality than to 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 








— 


aed elie + 


te 


ae ee + Pega SH hk 


= 


_ 
ri 

7 

‘ 


. —m , = ss ie Sct SPARE IRA SLRS TN 
gee re et ai Ee : + ay PR Ces “< 
s< - +: 2 


t~ Serer teeta, 





” ~~ * 
eo tet aa s be 
SAD dF ARIANA GROG SEE NY we 














a desire to check Russia at every point. 

WORLD CANNOT REMAIN STATIC. Some 
people, while admitting that not everything Russia 
has done is evil, say they would feel less worried if 
Moscow would only state how far it intends to go. 
Desirable as that would be, it is difficult to see how 
any nation at a given moment in history can honestly 
give such information. Had the England of Queen 
Elizabeth's day, for example, been asked to define its 
ultimate ambitions, could it have been held to them, 
when English explorers and statesmen of later days 
saw new worlds to develop? Could George Wash- 
ington, or Lincoln, have defined with precision just 
how far the United States would carry its flag, its 
trade, and its influence? What people usually mean 
when they ask Russia to specify its final goals is that 
they would like to see the world settle down to a 


_condition of stability involving no further major 


changes. Admittedly that would be a more restful 
world. But human society has never found it possible 
to remain static for any length of time. Young na- 
tions contend with older ones for leadership and, 
having won, find themselves challenged in turn by 
newcomers on the world scene. 

IS RUSSIA DIFFERENT FROM GERMANY ? 
But, it may legitimately be asked, how then is Russia 
different from Germany or Japan? If we fought the 
aspirations of the Axis for a larger place in the sun, 
shall we not sooner or later have to fight Russia? 
Or, conversely, if we are to let Russia have its way, 
should we not have been equally tolerant with the 
Axis? That is a fair question, and it lies at the very 
core of Mr. Churchill’s appeal for an Anglo-Amer- 
ican military alliance. Mr. Churchill proved to be a 
wise and far-sighted Cassandra in the case of Ger- 
many at a time when many others in positions of 
leadership tragically miscalculated Hitler’s objectives. 
For that reason alone, if for no other, he deserves a 
hearing—especially since some of the methods used 
by Russia toward neighboring countries are troubling- 


sly reminiscent of Hitler’s methods. 


The difference is that the kind of society the 
Russians are striving to create in the USSR. 


Page Two 











ee 
— 


—painfully, and at great cost in sacrifices of lives 
and materials—is a society to which masses of 
people in other, even more backward, areas of the 
world have been aspiring, usually with little support 
or sympathy from the Western powers. In that sense 
Russia’s struggle at home is in harmony with the 
spirit of our times, and efforts to foster the creation, 
along its borders, of governments favorable to its 
system frequently find a response among the peoples 
of border countries. Not that these peoples want to 
be governed from Moscow, or even necessarily to 
adopt the Russian pattern; but they are impressed by 
what Russia has achieved in a quarter of a century, 
and would like to emulate that achievement. It might 
be answered that the Nazis, too, found sympathizers 
in the countries they sought to bring within their 
orbit. But here is a fundamental difference: Nazism 
itself was nurtured in a soil of decadent German cap. 
italism and violent racialism that held no promise of 
growth for civilization, and attracted outside Ger- 
many the most reactionary elements in all circles. 
Nazism was a dead end. Russia, unlike Germany, is 
emerging from backwardness, not returning to it, 
and holds out a promise for the future. 

The United States can hold out an even greater 
promise, with surer prospect of fulfilment because 
of our unequalled industrial productivity—provided 
we can make up our minds which side of the struggle 
of our times we are on. That does not mean that we 
must align ourselves with Britain against Russia, or 
with Russia against Britain. On the contrary, the best 
contribution we could make would be not to align 
with either, but instead to put our power squarely 
behind the United Nations Organization; to support 
and if possible initiate every practicable international 
action looking toward progressive broadening of 
freedom and opportunity for all; to eschew the 
counsel of our nationalists, who are just as danger- 
ous to world peace as the nationalists of Britain or 
Russia; and to give peoples who are on the verge of 
despairing of democracy the hope that we have not 
succumbed to counsels of reaction and despair. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


WILL U.S. SEEK INTERNATIONAL ACTION AGAINST PERON? 


On the basis of a partial tally of the three million 
votes cast in the Argentine elections of February 24, 
the candidate of the democratic opposition, Dr. José 
Tamborini, has conceded victory to Colonel Juan 
Domingo Perén. The position of the man who has 
for months been the power behind the presidency has 
been legalized by a popular vote that was no more 
fraudulent than many previous Argentine elections. 
The real fraud was committed long before the elec- 
tions, when the Castillo government imposed martial 
law upon the country in December 1941, and at the 
close of 1943, when the men around President 
Ramirez closed down political parties, permitting 


them to reorganize only on the eve of the elections. 

ARGENTINA IN REVOLUTION. That the 
democratic opposition did not have time or oppor- 
tunity to gather itself for an effective campaign 
against Perén’s formidable police and labor machine 
is undeniable. But the most convincing explanation 
of Perén’s surprisingly large majority lies in his 
genuine appeal to the rank and file of Argentine 
labor, rural and industrial alike, an appeal which 
the Conservatives and the Radicals, the major parties 
leagued against him, either would not or could not 
make during their own ascendancy. The men who 
took power in 1943, have seen what the opposition 


= 


has not 
is in th 
tive nin 
ened ry) 
which 
worker 
The na 
labor V 
increas 
enlight 
freedot 
gressiv 
The 
crats, 

suppor 
the ent 
force, 

labor \ 
of the 
radio. 

try on 
consti 
to be 

stituti 
lock | 


much 


US 
which 
electic 
contre 
ary 12 
high 1 
and t 
accom 
lof th 
recor 
States 
Dem 
Book 
docut 
the “ 
their 
there 
will | 
State 
of cr 
by th 
Arge 
the ¢ 
TI 
and 

dus 


PORE] 
Headqt 


oe me 














ter 
se 
led 
ple 


we 


est 
ign 
ely 
ort 
nal 


the 
rer 

or 
} of 
not 


ns. 
the 
Or- 
ign 
ine 
ion 
his 
ine 
ich 
ties 
not 
vho 





—_" 


has not entirely understood, namely that the country 
sin the grip of a revolution in which the conserva- 
ive nineteenth century values of the landed “enlight- 
ened oligarchy” are giving way to new concepts in 
which the peon, the meat packer and the construction 
worker have suddenly assumed political importance. 
The nationalists, recognizing this, have approached 
bor with concessions of labor legislation and wage 
increases, which have obscured for all but the most 
enlightened of Argentine workers the fact that their 
freedom of action has at the same time been pro- 
gressively curtailed. 

The coalition of the Radicals, Progressive Demo- 
cats, Socialists and Communists, with equivocal 
support from the Conservatives, was confronted by 
the entire machinery of the state—the swollen police 
force, the Department of Labor and its controlled 
labor unions, the federally-controlled adminiscrations 
of the provinces, and the Perén-inspired press and 
radio. The democrats made their appeal to the coun- 
ty on the basis of the evident need for a return to 
constitutional normality. But people’s memories had 
to be long indeed to recall a period when “‘con- 
situtional normality’’ had not meant a state of dead- 
lk between these same parties which frustrated 
much legislative activity. 


U.S. VERBAL INTERVENTION. The influence 
which the State Department’s Blue Book had on the 
dection results will probably long be a point of 
controversy among Argentines. The release on Febru- 
ary 12 of captured German documents compromising 
high members of the present Argentine government 
ad the preceding Castillo administration, and an 
accompanying analysis of the nazi-fascist character 
of the régime, were obviously designed to put on 
teord at the height of the campaign the United 
Sates’ view of the nationalist government. But the 
Democratic Union hesitated to make use of the Blue 
Book’s evidence, while the Peronistas fell upon the 
document with glad cries as one more example of 
the “yanqui’” government's private vendetta against 
their leader. Now that the issue has been resolved, 
there will be no lack of people in the opposition who 
will ascribe defeat to the intervention of the United 
States. But the inevitable risk of incurring this type 
of criticism was outweighed, in Washington’s view, 
ly the importance of putting its case directly to the 
Argentine people, through the medium of informing 
the other American Republics. 

The Blue Book was the United States’ trump card 
ind perhaps its only card against Perdén. Like previ- 
dus indictments, it has failed and, until this coun- 


Ee 





Page Three 





——— 
— 





try is in a position to do more than flay the Argen- 
tine government with words, the technique of verbal 
intervention will win us more enemies than 
friends in Latin America. One solution of this ad- 
mittedly difficult situation—a situation in which re- 
treat is almost as impossible as advance—is, of course, 
to recognize the Perén administration. There is an 
influential body of opinion in this country and abroad 
that is pressing for a decision on our part which 
will once more place relations with Argentina on a 
“normal” basis. As Perén cultivates the friendship 
and trade of the other great powers, notably Britain 
and Russia, the pressure of this group will become 
more insistent. 


If, however, Washington adheres to its position, 
at least three possible choices are open to it within 
the framework of international action to which the 
United States subscribes: 


1. This government, at a specially called inter- 
American conference, can press for a decision to 
withdraw diplomatic recognition from the Perdén 
government, while at the same time exploring 
available means of implementing diplomatic sanc- 
tions by more concrete measures. Now, however, this 
approach seems to have even less chance of success 
than before, owing to the traditional Latin Amer- 
ican insistence on automatic recognition of a govern- 
ment that has come into office by due process of law. 


2. By supporting the French move to bring the 
Spanish question before the next meeting of the 
UNO Security Council, which opens in New York 
City on March 25, the United States might hope to 
isolate and bring pressure on the Argentine govern- 
ment. It can be argued that, owing to the peculiar 
influence that Spain exercises in its former colonies, 
the continuance of the Franco régime strengthens 
Perén’s chances of survival. This approach, however, 
presupposes that the United States is ready to under- 
take stronger measures against the Spanish govern- 
ment than the tripartite note of March 5 indicated. 


sy 


3. This government, finally, can propose to the 
Security Council that Argentina be suspended from 
the UNO. Since Europe desperately needs Argentine 
foodstuffs, it is appropriate and necessary that the 
European powers, France and Britain particularly, 
share the decision with the American Republics. 
Whatever course is taken, in the last analysis, it is a 
question of balancing the need for Argentine wheat 
and beef against the danger of fascism and aggres- 
sion which the government of that country represents. 


OLIVE HOLMES 





month for change of address on membership publications. 


B81 





REIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 23, Marcu 22, 1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRanK Ross McCoy, President; Dornoruy F. Lugr, Secretary; Vera MIcHELES Dgan, Editor. Entered as 
*tond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


ia 
' 
a 
{i 

7 

i 
on 
iH | 










ta 





a A Ta TROND 


AOL Fine 


ET IE RS. RE 
= ; : 


A ak ARTE tate ie eel iA Se hy Sass: we 2 


OL TEINS 





{ 
; 
: 


Washington News Letter 











S 





REPUBLICANS STILL DIVIDED ON FOREIGN POLICY ISSUES 


The strong influence which members of the minor- 
ity party exert on the policies of the federal adminis- 
tration has become an important phenomenon on 
Capitol Hill. In recent years individual Republicans 
have helped in a positive way to frame the foreign 
policy of Democratic presidents by two different 
means. First of all, selected members of the minority 
party took part in the talks at the State Department 
in 1944 which formulated the United States official 
attitude toward international cooperation, and also 
participated in the San Francisco Conference in 1945, 
which brought forth the United Nations Charter. 
Lately, the minority has been influential in its more 
customary role, through criticism of the course fol- 
lowed by the Administration in seeking to achieve 
its goals in foreign affairs. 


REPUBLICANS MAY BECOME MAJORITY. 
The Republican contribution to the making of for- 
eign policy would be greater if leading Republicans 
could agree among themselves about the kind of 
policy they want to espouse. The task of agreement 
is complicated, however, not only by differences in 
outlook and emphasis on international questions, 
but by varying estimates of the type of foreign policy 
the voters are most likely to support in the 1948 
presidential elections. This is an especially important 
consideration to the Republican leaders, since the 
possibility exists that they will gain control of the 
Administration at that time. And, more immediately, 
they may at least win a majority in the House of 
Representatives in this November’s Congressional 
elections. 


The most prominent Republicans who might seek 
the presidential nomination in 1948 include Governor 
Thomas E. Dewey of New York, the 1944 nominee; 
Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg of Michigan, a 
member of the United States delegation to the San 
Francisco Conference and to the first meeting of the 
General Assembly of the United Nations in London 
in January and February; Senator Robert H. Taft 
of Ohio; John W. Bricker, former governor of Ohio; 
and Harold E. Stassen, former governor of Minne- 
sota and a member of the United States delegation 
to the San Francisco conference. 


RECENT REPUBLICAN STATEMENTS. 
Among Republican leaders there are some disagree- 
ments over the meaning of Russian foreign policy 
and over the attitude which the United States should 
adopt toward Russia. As a group they are uncertain 


whether public questioning of Russian intentions 
harmful or necessary to the cause of internation, 
cooperation. The problem of Russia disturbs Dewey 
Vandenberg and Bricker particularly. At the muni, 
cipal dinner in New York City on March 16 fy 
Winston Churchill, who 10 days earlier had couple 
a plea for Anglo-American “faternal association’ 
with harsh criticism of Russia, Dewey said: ‘As long 
as our two nations stand firmly for freedom, we shall 
never be long alone.” The implied concern aboy 
Russia in Dewey’s words had been put sharply by 
Vander,berg on February 27, when he said: “What 
is Russia up to now? It is of course the supreme 
conundrum of our time.” While Vandenberg held 
himself to a consideration of Russian policy outside 
Russian boundaries, Bricker on March 13, at a forum 
of the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in Ney 
York City, criticized Russian domestic policy: “h 
Italy under Mussolini, in Germany under Hitler, in 
Japan under Tojo, and in Russia today under Stalin, 


the individual man is nothing. He exists only as the 


tool of the all-powerful state.” 


Stassen has criticized such proposals for associa 
tion with Britain and such comments about Russia 
in the belief that they may injure the United Nations 
“The best hope of the goal of peace is to develop 
and strengthen the United Nations Organization,’ 
Stassen said in St. Paul on March 14. “This means 
that the United States must not tie its foreign pol 
icy down to any other one nation, but develop: 
definite policy which is its own policy, plainly dis 
cussed with its own people, and open and clear to 
the world.” In Toledo on February 22 he said: “We 
must begin at once a forthright search, on a bipar- 
tisan basis, for the specific policies with which we 
can expect continuing friendly relations with Russia 
Then these policies should be frankly and firmly dis 
cussed with the Soviet Union.” 


The Republican with whom Stassen is most closely 
allied in his views on foreign affairs is Henry Cabot 
Lodge, Jr., former Senator from Massachusetts, who, 
in addresses in January before the Foreign Policy As 
sociation branches in Minneapolis, St. Paul and Mil 
waukee, urged an attitude of restraint in comment 
on Russia. Stassen soon will test the strength of his 
opinions in his own state when he backs Minnesota’ 
Governor Edward J. Thye in a campaign for the 
Senate seat held by isolationist Henrik L. Shipstead. 


BLA BOLLES 














