—1945 


-ENDS 


ks of food. 
F edibles to 
the popula. 
630 calories 
at to go for. 
e failure of 
om Holland 
ion that has 
the Nether. 
| with trans. 
gion. 


outbreak of | 


lotted 400,- 
for gifts to 
. On March 
ented a bill 
70,000,000 
‘or gifts. At 
»priation of 
shabilitation 
untries. The 
construction 
ful whether 
idertake the 
ike possible 
of the war. 
> the equiv. 
Sweden has 
during the 
; immediate 
to Norway 
Norwegian 
; and $18- 


‘not only to 
lining influ: 
ctive propa: 
ombs failed 
wedes, how 
e for many 
"y may enter 
th policy if 
ise in neigh 
ich it is im 
- Per Edvin 
10unced the 
n the United 


R BOLLES 
INDS 


APR 17 1945 


bc ee Entered as 2nd class matter 


neste PERIODICAL roon 
coun, TUNBRAL LIBRAR* 
- OF Micr 


FOREIGN POLICY 


BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


ia XXIV, No. 25 


Apri. 6, 1945 


—_ 


9 extent to which political and economic de- 
velopments in Europe, sharply accelerated by the 
nilitary successes of the Allies, are influencing the 
in Francisco Conference even before its opening 
yas strikingly indicated during the past week. The 
mquest made by the Soviet government on March 22, 
nd promptly rejected by Britain and the United 
Mates, that the Polish provisional government, 
whether or not broadened to include other Polish 
laders, should be invited to San Francisco; Stalin's 
femand at Yalta, revealed on March 29, that Russia 
hould have three votes in the General Assembly 
mvisaged by the Dumbarton Oaks proposals; the 
mxiety expressed by French Foreign Minister 
Georges Bidault concerning United States proposals 
fr an “international trusteeship” over colonial ter- 
titories—all reflect the expectation that, as the war 
nm Europe reaches its climax, a showdown on post- 
wat problems becomes inevitable. Had an interna- 
ional organization been established a year, or even 
ix months ago, we would have had machinery to 
landle these problems. As things stand now, plans 
for the San Francisco Conference appear to have 
len outrun by the tide of events. 

WITHOUT BENEFIT OF PEACE CONFER- 
INCE. It has long been apparent that adjustments 
if many controversial issues on the continent would 
lot wait for a final peace settlement similar to the 
ties of peace treaties that closed World War I. 
Military necessity dictated the conclusion by Britain 
ind the United States of an armistice with Italy in 
43 (the terms of which have not yet been made 
ublic) ; and the subsequent negotiation by the Big 
Three, with Russia acting on behalf of its Allies, of 
umistices with Finland, Rumania, Bulgaria and 
Hungary, all of which contain far-reaching terti- 
rial, political and economic provisions usually re- 
“tved in the past for peace treaties. It is very doubt- 


URGENT POLITICAL ISSUES STEAL SPOTLIGHT FROM SAN FRANCISCO 


ful that a peace conference, if one should be held 
at the close of the European war, would undertake 
to revise such items as the cession of strategic areas 
by Finland to Russia; the return by Rumania to 
Russia of Bessarabia and Bukovina; or the surrender 
by Hungary of Transylvania, whose civilian adminis- 
tration was turned over by Stalin to the Rumanian 
government of Premier Groza on March 9. While 
Britain and the United States may have originally 
hoped to postpone territorial settlements in Eastern 
Europe until after the end of the war, their participa- 
tion in the four armistices concluded with Germany's 
satellites in that area would indicate acquiescence in 
their territorial terms. In fact, proposals for eventual 
revision of border arrangements by a United Nations 
organization, as suggested in Senator Vandenberg’s 
memorandum published on April 2, would cause 
grave misgivings in Moscow. 

POLAND’S EXPANSION. As Russian forces 
overrun eastern and northern Germany, the Soviet 
government proceeds to implement the statement 
made by Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin at Yalta 
when they said that “they recognize that Poland must 
receive substantial accessions of territory in the 
north and west.” On March 31 the Warsaw radio 
announced that the Polish provisional government 
had set up a Province of Danzig, including the city 
of Danzig, strategic Baltic naval base, and several 
cities of the former Polish Corridor. This step may 
be criticized in London and Washington on two 
points, both specified in the Yalta announcement. 
In that document the Big Three leaders had said, 
first, that they feel that the opinion of the proposed 
Polish Provisional Government of National Unity 
(not yet formed) should be sought in due course on 
the extent of “Poland’s accessions at the expense of 
Germany’; and, second, that final delimitation of the 
western frontier should await the peace conference. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


The most troubling immediate problem is that the 
Big Three commission in Moscow—charged by the 
Yalta Conference with the task of helping to reor- 
ganize the Lublin régime, now transferred to War- 
saw, ‘‘on a broader democratic basis with the inclu- 
sion of democratic leaders from Poland itself and 
from Poles abroad’’—has so far found it impossible 
to acccomplish its task. The contention of the Soviet 
government in its request of March 22 is that repre- 
sentatives of that régime should be invited to repre- 
sent Poland at the San Francisco Conference, irre- 
spective both of the failure so far to broaden its 
composition, and of its nonrecognition by Britain 
and the United States. 

This may appear to the Western powers as spe- 
cious reasoning. But everything depends on the angle 
from which a particular international situation is 
viewed by a particular nation. At a moment when 
Britain and the United States are making every effort 
to align Argentina on the anti-Axis side—although 
no move in the direction of democratic practices has 
been made internally by the Farrell régime—and 
when this country, by increased purchases in Spain, 
appears to be strengthening the position of Franco, 
who openly fought Russia, it may seem reasonable 
in Moscow to line up Poland on its side in the forth- 
coming international organization. 

ADDED VOTES FOR BIG THREE? A similar 
concern to improve Russia’s bargaining position lies 
behind the demand for three votes in the General 
Assembly, to balance off those of Britain and the 
Dominions. This demand President Roosevelt is re- 
ported to have agreed to submit to the San Francisco 
Conference, having first reserved the right to submit 
a request for three votes for the United States if 
Russia’s request is approved. Ever since the an- 
nouncement of Foreign Commissar Molotov on 
February 1, 1944 that the 16 constituent repub- 
lics of the U.S.S.R. were to maintain their own 
military contingents and conduct their own foreign 
affairs, it had been expected that Moscow would 
ask for 16 votes in an international organization. So 


ARGENTINE’S ENTRY INTO WAR MAY BOLSTER FARRELL DICTATORSHIP 


Argentina’s long-overdue declaration of war was 
made possible by the Mexico City invitation to Ar- 
gentina to adhere to the Final Act of the Inter-Amer- 
ican Conference. On March 27 the military govern- 
ment declared that a state of war existed between 
Argentina and Japan and Germany, “in view of the 
latter’s character as an ally of Japan.” Heretofore, 
Buenos Aires had justified its neutrality on the 
ground that Germany and Japan had given it no rea- 
son for war; more recently, it claimed that a declara- 
tion of war against Germany would be “unchival- 
rous” in the light of German defeats. But the Mex- 
ico City resolution afforded the necessary pretext, 


Page Two 


— 
far it has limited its request for separate votes to thy 
White Russian S.S.R. (which includes Polish Whit 
Russia) and the Ukrainian S.S.R. (which include 
Polish Ukraine), in addition to the vote of th 
U.S.S.R. proper. 


To what extent this demand is dictated by natiop, 
alist sentiment in the two republics—notably amon 
the Ukrainians, who have a long history of nationg) 
consciousness—remains for the time being a matte 
of speculation. As long as the Security Council of 
the proposed United Nations organization is dom. 
inated by the Big Three, it is difficult to see what 
beyond prestige, is achieved by additional votes jg 
the General Assembly which, according to the Dum. 
barton Oaks proposals, “should not on its own initia. 
tive make recommendations on any matter relating 
to the maintenance of international peace and secur. 
ity which is being dealt with by the Security Coun. 
cil." At the same time, several American political 
scientists have already pointed out the incongruity 
of having equal numerical representation in the Gen. 
eral Assembly for countries indubitably unequal in 
many respects; and it has been suggested that votes 
should be allotted on the basis not only of popula. 
tion, but also of literacy, economic development, 
social progress, and so on. What must be regretted 
about the Yalta discussion of this point is not that it 
should have been raised, but that it should have been 
raised in a crudely mechanistic form which threatens 
to block constructive discussion of a valid and im. 
portant question. 


The key to Russia’s attitude toward San Francisco, 
however, is neither the status of the Polish régime 
nor the number of votes to be held by the great pov. 
ers in the General Assembly, but the belief that the 
conference, specifically called to set up the machinery 
of international organization, will not touch on the 
fundamental problems of peace-making and security. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(The second in a series of articles on political trends in Europe 
on the eve of San Francisco.) 


and Argentina lost little time in acting on it—citing 
the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor as one of the 
principal reasons for its move. 

BUENOS AIRES RECEPTION COOL. Accord 
ing to dispatches from the capital city, federal police 
had to take the unusual precaution of throwing 3 
cordon around the embassies of Argentina’s new 4 
lies, to protect them from nationalist demonstrations 
But, on the whole, the public received the news with 
somewhat the same indifference that characterized it 
response to the breaking of diplomatic relations four 
teen months ago: while Argentines were glad tht 
the government had finally abandoned its equivocd 


—_—_——— 
= 


stand o 
foreign 
possible 
attach ; 
prestige 
Mexico 
Argenti 
jon, un 
ically N 
the pec 
democr: 
and to 
cared t 
far rem 
betwee! 
tives an 
governt 
the less 
If pu 
therefo: 
ity tow: 
this cur 
rather t 
ency are 
litical r 
the wa 
minds, 
while 
seize eV 
en its s 
WH 
In brea 
year, tl 
desire | 
face Wi 
not de 
State L 
spond | 
that, i 
would 
regards 
the At 
econon 
retentic 
mand 
large 
Argent 
tural n 
contro] 
Poli 
impel 
war. | 
_... 
FOREIGN 
Headquart 
second-cla 
one mont! 


@ 


votes to the 
lish Whitd 
ch include 
ote of thé 


1 by nation. 
ably among 
of national 
1g a Matte 
Council of 
on is dom. 
O see what, 
ial votes in 
o the Dum. 
; OWN initia. 
ter relating 
e and secur. 
urity Coun. 
an political 
incongruity 
in the Gen. 
unequal in 
d that votes 
r of popula. 
evelopment, 
be regretted 
is not that it 
id have been 
ich threatens 
lid and im- 


in Francisco, 
olish régime 
ie great pow 
lief that the 
he machinery 
touch on the 
and security, 


ILES DEAN 


ends in Europe 


TORSHIP 
on it—citing 
is one of the 


OL. Accord: 
federal police 
f throwing 4 
tina’s new al 
~monstrations. 
the news with 
aracterized its 
relations four 
rere glad that 
| its equivocdl 


es 


stand on the war, they resented the appearance of 
foreign pressure that accompanied the move. It is 
possible that now, however, the Argentine does not 
attach as much importance to the loss of national 
prestige as he did a year ago. In a message to the 
Mexico City Conference the Committee of Exiled 
Argentines, representing all shades of political opin- 
ion, unequivocally stated that “dealing with a typ- 
ically Nazi government . . . which does not represent 
the people, would be equivalent to negating the 
democratic affirmations made by the United Nations 
and to displacing security with distrust,” and de- 
clared the Estrada doctrine of automatic recognition 
far removed from present realities. If he must choose 
between foreign intervention for democratic objec- 
tives and the further encroachments of a dictatorial 
government, the Argentine of 1945 knows which is 
the lesser evil. 

If public reaction was frigid to the news of war, 
therefore, it was not because of widespread hostil- 
ity toward the idea of external pressure—although 
this current, of course, persists in some quarters—but 
rather because the internal consequences of belliger- 
ency are greatly feared. The chances of obtaining po- 
litical reforms are now indefinitely postponed. With 
the wartime experience of Brazil vivid in their 
minds, Argentines fear that the military clique— 
while professing a democratic foreign policy—will 
seize every Opportunity through war decrees to tight- 
en its stranglehold on governing processes at home. 

WHY DID ARGENTINA DECLARE WAR? 
In breaking diplomatic relations with the Axis last 
year, the government was largely motivated by the 
desire to obtain lend-lease goods to speed its arms 
face with Brazil. But surely the military clique does 
not delude itself that the new incumbents of the 
State Department will be any more disposed to re- 
spond to so patent a bid than was Secretary Hull or 
that, in any case, public opinion in this country 
would now permit such shipments to Argentina. As 
regards its post-war economic situation, moreover, 
the Argentine government is well aware that its 
economy can be maintained comfortably through the 
retention of British markets and the renewed de- 
mand for its foodstuffs in liberated Europe. With 
large exchange balances located in this country, 
Argentina will be able to purchase stocks of agricul- 
tural machinery and capital equipment once wartime 
controls are lifted. 

Political, not military or economic, considerations 
impelled the Farrell-Perén government to declare 
war. For disapproval of its policies is general in 


Page Three 


Latin America, as well as in the United States, and 
too marked to be ignored. Buenos Aires may have 
believed that, if it could succeed in dispelling con- 
tinental opprobrium, it would obtain the half-prom- 
ised incorporation into the group of United Nations 
in time to attend the United Nations Conference. 
Although the deadline for invitations to San Fran- 
cisco had passed, that government may hope that the 
United States, while publicly laying emphasis on the 
necessity for a world approach to security planning, 
will privately welcome all possible support from the 
Latin American states at the April meeting. Even if 
this assumption were founded on some measure of 
truth, however, it is reported that a Red Star editorial 
last week asserted that, if Argentina were invited, 
Russia would not attend the Conference. 

EARLY RECOGNITION FOR ARGENTINA? 
The Mexico City resolution did not specify what 
would be the entrance requirements for admittance 
to the United Nations. But in the Joint Declaration 
of the United Nations, these governments pledge 
themselves to employ their full resources, military or 
economic, against those members of the Tripartite 
Pact with whom they are at war. The government of 
Argentina has moved to suppress the Axis press as 
well as some nationalist organs—but at the same 
time suspended two democratic newspapers, Noficias 
Graficas and Vanguardia. \n addition, registration 
and control of the movements of all aliens, including 
those who have acquired Argentine nationality, was 
decreed. An administrator of Axis firms has been 
appointed to supervise the commercial and financial 
activities of all Axis subjects. 

Whether these measures will prove effective in 
eliminating Axis activities in Argentina depends en- 
tirely on the Farrell-Perén government. While the 
American republics have not in any way obligated 
themselves to accord diplomatic recognition or even 
to consult together on Argentina’s latest move, their 
anxiety to receive Argentina back into the American 
family of nations may lead them to assume good in- 
tentions on the basis of insufficient evidence. This 
happened once before, with regrettable conse- 
quences, when the American states recognized the 
Ramirez government brought to power by the June 
4, 1943 revolution. It may be that the new direction 
of frre ay 2 s policy is to recognize Argentina at 
an early date, and send to that country an ambassador 
of vigorous democratic leanings who would report 
fully on progress toward the suppression of Axis ac- 
tivities and encourage by his presence the reconstruc- 
tion of constitutional government. Ozrve HoLMES 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. 


XXIV, No. 25, 
Headquarters, 


22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


APRIL 6, 1945. 


o€ month for change of address on membership publications. 


B> 151 


Produced under union conditions 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Lugt, Secretary 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y 


Association, Incorporated. National 
; Vera Micue.es Dagan, Editor. Entered as 
., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News L etter 


WILL CONGRESS BACK MEASURES FOR WORLD ECONOMIC COOPERATION? 


The charter for international political and military 
cooperation to be drawn up at the San Francisco 
Conference will be only one rail in the track to a 
lasting peace. The other will be a system for bolster- 
ing a moderate prosperity in the various nations, 
which seek security as much from the torments of 
unemployment and depression as from some aggres- 
sive neighbor. The need for this second track has 
prompted the Administration to present to Congress 
a number of proposals which are designed in the 
long run to contribute to economic security both in 
this country and abroad. 


FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY PROPOSALS. 
Together the proposals make up the substance of a 
foreign economic policy for the United States. They 
fall into two categories — agreements with other 
states, and purely national acts which would affect 
other states. Outstanding in the first category are the 
Bretton Woods agreements for establishment of an 
International Monetary Fund and an International 
Bank; the agreement for the United Nations Food 
and Agriculture Organization; the agreements 
reached at the Chicago Aviation Conference; and the 
Mexican Water Treaty. 


In the second category are the Trade Agreements 
Extension Act, whose passage President Roosevelt 
urged in a message to Congress on March 26; the bill 
extending lend-lease; legislation that would guide 
the post-war sale of ships from the United States 
merchant fleet; and bills prolonging the export sub- 
sidies on wheat and cotton shipped from the United 
States. The Administration will also shortly submit 
to Congress proposals to increase the lending power 
of the Export-Import Bank to $2,000,000,000 or 
$2,500,000,000; to repeal the Johnson Act; and to 
provide more funds for UNRRA. 


Congress has been scrutinizing these proposals long 
and cautiously. The Senate Foreign Relations Com- 
mittee reported the Mexican Water Treaty on Febru- 
ary 23, but the Senate has not yet completed its de- 
bate on this instrument for specialized economic co- 
operation between the United States and Mexico. The 
House Banking and Currency Committee began hear- 
ings on the Bretton Woods agreements on March 7, 
and these are not yet completed. The Administration 
expects swifter progress through the Capitol for the 
food and agriculture agreement, but its hopes may 
be disappointed. President Roosevelt on March 26 


FOR VICTORY ° 


sent a message to Congress favoring the Food and 
Agriculture Organization. On March 27 Chairman 
Bloom of the House Foreign Affairs Committee in. 
troduced a joint resolution authorizing the United 
States to accept membership in the organization. He 
has scheduled the first hearings for April 12. 


Meanwhile, the House passed the lend-lease ex- 
tension act on March 13. Five Republicans success. 
fully sponsored an amendment to this Act forbidding 
the use of lend-lease for “post-war relief, rehabilita. 
tion or reconstruction.” A statement concerning the 
legislation by one of the five, Representative Vorys 
of Ohio, reflected the growing determination of 
Congress to participate actively in foreign affairs; 
“It shows complete agreement between the executive 
and both parties in Congress that our post-war plans 
and policies will be submitted to Congress, and the 
approval of a majority in both parties is sought for 
these policies.” 


STRUGGLE AHEAD ON TRADE AGREE 
MENTS. The central concept behind the economic 
foreign policy program is that the whole world will 
gain through the elimination of preferences in inter- 
national commerce and the lowering of tariff barriers. 
This concept conflicts with the view held by some 
that any one country might best increase its pros- 
perity and serve its commercial interests through 
special agreements in a limited area. The Adminis- 
tration program has opponents at home, in the pro- 
tectionists, and abroad, in the supporters of special 
agreements like Empire preference and the sterling 
bloc. Britain, for example, finds it difficult to recon- 
cile American advocacy of nondiscrimination with 
our policy of subsidizing cotton exports. 


The issue between those two points of view on 
foreign economic policy will be joined most clearly 
over the Trade Agreements Extension Act, for which 
Chairman Doughton of the House Ways and Means 
Committee introduced a resolution on March 16. 
Hearings will begin before that committee on Apzil 
16. The extension bill would authorize the Adminis- 
tration to negotiate trade agreements for three years 
beyond June 12, 1945, and in the negotiations to re 
duce by 50 per cent tariffs existing on January |, 
1945. A strong group in Congress will strive to 
amend the Act to provide for Congressional review 
of every trade agreement made under its authority. 


BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


— 
Vou. X XI 


—_—_—_—_—— 


IS Cc 


HE b 
rectio 
gmilar te 
ent wee 
advances 
up its Fa 
japan of 
tality pz 
yay to | 
wok the 
MacArth 
f comm 
Navy fo 
jpanese 
sa mil 
END | 
denuncia 
most tO 

ong loo! 
wuld b 
the East 
hat the 

$s impo: 
hat Jap 
ind has \ 
Mates ar 
viet e1 
vaiting | 
Yet tl 
viet U 
Tokyo 1 
itiking 

Var is ir 
karing 

millions 
Xpectec 
Tokyo's 
he othe 


