-S€ COM. 
ir fi 
a large. 
ultimate 


fighting 
» loss of 
wed the 
the mili. 
strength. 
on from 
o Japan, 
bombs— 
© people, 
suppress 
s vulner- 
eared in 
> of the 
1 Tokyo 
yreted as 
am paign- 
vance on 
are bal- 
ese diff 
es march 
tion still 
itary Con 
nit with- 
n China? 
will far 
BISSON 


RECTOR 


. Buell— 
Directors 
an as Re 
sociation. 
slications. 


al organi- 
articularly 


hall. 
) 
reign rela- 
in college 
y either a 
rial. 


New York, 


Ann 


ht by three 
ited States 


sd.  Natior 
DEAN, 


Editor. 


oa, ‘°° 


Vou. XVII, No. 32 


oe. = 


=|FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


BAL Ronm 


Pa Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


JUNE 3, 1938 


JAPAN IN CHINA. By T. A. Bisson. 
Macmillan. $3. 


Here, at last, is a first-hand picture of the war, and a clear 
and authoritative analysis of background events, particularly 
those since 1933. The result is a deeply interesting record of 
the political and social changes that have taken place both in 
China and Japan. 


The New York Times says: ‘Mr. Bisson puts the whole show 
into perspective with exceptional skill and clarity.” 


417 pages. 


JUN 7 1938 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Michican 


eee ae. 


A FASCIST CABINET IN JAPAN 


A CRISIS in Tokyo’s government circles, linked 
directly to the costly defeat suffered by the 
Japanese army at Taierhchuang on April 6, has sim- 
mered below the surface for many weeks. Immediate 
action to allay this crisis was postponed lest it be in- 
terpreted as a sign of weakness. Following the cap- 
ture of Hsiichow, however, a drastic reorganization 
became possible. The ministerial changes announced 
on May 26 have set up a Cabinet in which five service 
men—three generals and two admirals—hold key 
posts. Three new appointees have already assumed 
ofice. They include General Kazushige Ugaki, new 
Foreign Minister; General Sadao Araki, Minister of 
Education; and Mr. Seihin Ikeda, Minister of 
Finance. In addition, Lieutenant-General Seishiro 
Itagaki, hitherto in command of a division in China, is 
slated to become Minister of War. The appointment 
of outstanding army extremists to Cabinet positions, 
even more than the increased army representation, 
carries the dictatorial trend in Japan’s political life 
to a new high. For the first time, direct representa- 
tives of the military-fascist clique occupy a position 
of controlling influence within the government itself. 


Three of the Ministers—if the appointment of 
Itagaki to the War Office is confirmed—are promi- 
nent advocates of a fascist organization of the Jap- 
anese state. Admiral Suetsugu, who was made Home 
Minister in December, is the outstanding represen- 
tative of this tendency in Japanese naval circles, 
which are generally more moderate than the army. 
General Araki has been the exemplar of the army 
extremists since 1931; his closest associate, General 
Mazaki, was held under investigation for eighteen 
months on suspicion of complicity in the Tokyo mili- 
tary uprising of February 26-29, 1936. General 
Araki, moreover, is an inveterate foe of the Soviet 
Union; only last fall, his provocative statements 


——— 


brought a protest from the Soviet government. 
Seishiro Itagaki was one of the original “young 
colonels” of the extremist movement in 1931-1932, 
which supported Araki’s efforts in the War Ministry. 
As chief-of-staff of the Kwantung Army in 1935- 
1936, Itagaki also played an important rdle in apply- 
ing the principles of “state socialism” to Manchou- 
kuo. Suetsugu, Araki and Itagaki are strong and 
aggressive personalities—a factor which will increase 
their weight in Cabinet deliberations. 

The degree to which General Ugaki and Seihin 
Ikeda, new Foreign and Finance Ministers, respec- 
tively, may be able or willing to exert a moderating 
influence is highly problematical. Ikeda is a former 
managing director of the Mitsui interests. As Gov- 
ernor of the Bank of Japan in the spring of 1937, he 
facilitated readjustments in Japanese economy forced 
by the vast increase in arms expenditures. During 
the election campaign of April 1937, he was an out- 
spoken defender of ‘‘productive expansion” of heavy 
industry for war purposes. Ikeda thus becomes a 
symbol of the close cooperation which has developed 
between the army and reactionary heavy industry in 
Japan. General Ugaki, although a liberal in his 
affiliations, is an uncertain support for the moderate 
cause. His ambition to become Prime Minister, 
blocked in February 1937 by his army opponents, 
will constrain him to play along with the extremists. 
Ugaki’s liberal record, moreover, is marred by com- 
plicity in the abortive March 1931 coup d’état—the 
first of the long line of recent military conspiracies. 


Some of the more immediate effects of the Cabinet 
shake-up are already: clear. The war in China will be 
prosecuted to a finish. All fears that a large-scale 
campaign in the Chinese interior may end incon- 
clusively, and therefore disastrously for Japan, will 
be set aside. Every effort will be concentrated on the 


task of “destroying Chiang Kai-shek’s government.” 
The flagging spirits of the Japanese people will be 
whipped up by an intensified “spiritual mobiliza- 
tion” campaign, directed by General Araki from the 
Education Ministry. Announcement by the Home 
Ministry on May 30 that 1,300 “Communist sus- 
pects” have been arrested since December 1936 may 
be expected to stimulate this propaganda campaign. 
Seihin Ikeda has stated that the Finance Ministry will 
concentrate on the critical problems of maintaining 
currency stability, conserving gold reserves, and re- 
moving obstacles to Japan’s export trade created by 
abnormal price rises. The Foreign Ministry, with 
the passing of a civilian head, forfeits even the ap- 
pearance of playing an independent rdle. As was 
done in the case of Manchoukuo, a new China bureau 
—-dominated by the military—will be set up within 
the Cabinet to determine all political and economic 
issues affecting China-occupied areas. The army, 
through the Imperial Headquarters, already controls 
the conduct of military operations in China; hence- 
forth, it will also assert exclusive control over the 
development of its conquests. With this fait accom- 
pli, Japan’s thin pretense that the “open door’’ will 
be preserved in China becomes even thinner. If the 
Japanese conquest is made good, China south of the 
Wall will be developed under army control—with 
an eye to military-strategic purposes—no less than 
Manchoukuo. 

The fighting along the Lunghai Railway indicates 
that the application of this “development” program 
is still some distance away. It is now obvious thar 
the Japanese command failed to obtain the crushing 
victory which it claimed at Hsiichow. The bulk of 
the Chinese troops escaped the trap set for them, 
reformed their lines east of Chengchow, and have 
counter-attacked in force. At the end of May the 
Japanese 14th Division under Lieutenant-General 
Doihara, another of Japan’s noted military-fascist 
leaders, was driven from Lanfeng and backed into 
a precarious position south of the Yellow River. 
Additional Japanese troops were being sent to this 
and other fronts on the new battle-line, which ex- 
tended in the form of a crescent from Wuhu, on the 
Yangtze River, north to Lanfeng on the Lunghai 
Railway. Along this 250-mile arc, the Japanese 
forces were attempting to push inland toward the 
Hankow-Chengchow railway artery of the Chinese 
defense. The vigorous opposition offered by China's 
armies suggests that this campaign may soon dwarf 
all preceding battles. Whether the Japanese will 
eventually balance their books with a decisive victory 
remains as problematical as ever. T. A. BIsson 


CRISIS IN PALESTINE 
The opening in Jerusalem, on May 16, of formal 
hearings by the British technical commission on Pal- 


Page Two —__ 


———— 


estine—appointed to draw up a detailed plan of 
partition*—may pave the way for a new era in th 
turbulent history of the Holy Land. While the Com, 
mission’s members were touring the country, its 
sition was strengthened on May 2 by Prime Ministe 
Chamberlain’s belated revelation that the Anglo. 
Italian agreement contained an oral Italian pledge 
to “abstain from creating difficulties or embarrass. 
ment”’ for Britain in Palestine. The Arabs have boy. 
cotted the commission since its arrival on April 27, 
in protest against the partition proposal. Arab te. 
rorist activities have been intensified, apparently jg 
an effort to convince the British that it would kk 
politic to meet the Arab demands. Demonstrations 
of protest against partition have been held in Egypy, 
Iraq and Syria, in which an undertone of anti 
Semitism has accompanied condemnation of British 
policy. At the same time there are signs that peace 
ful Arab villagers are wearying of the excessiy 
exactions of marauders, and that the hitherto ey. 
emplary self-restraint of even the extreme Jewish m. 
tionalists of the Revisionist movement may be 
wearing thin. 

The four government officials of the commission, 
under the chairmanship of Sir John Woodhead, are 
attempting to solve one of the knottiest problems of 
British imperial relations. Endemic unrest has now 
continued for over two years, with a death toll of 
about 2,000 despite all British efforts to re-establish 
order. Troops have been utilized to suppress law. 
lessness; a Royal Commission has recommended di 
vision of the country into an Arab, a Jewish anda 
British mandated area; Arab political leaders have 
been exiled or imprisoned; a modified form of mili: 
tary law has been applied; airplanes and police dogs 
are employed to track down Arab terrorist bands 
Yet the Arabs, who are admittedly the aggressors 
in a virtual rebellion against continuation of the 
mandate régime, have thus far resisted with up 
diminished vigor. Their exiled leader, Haj Amind 
Husseini, directs Arab nationalist activities from 
Beirut, in the Lebanese Republic, where he recruit 
terrorists for service in Palestine and conducts ant 
British and anti-Zionist propaganda in the surround 
ing Arab states. 

The recalcitrance of the Arabs, which undoubtedly 
reflects a growing nationalist sentiment, may be due 
in part to the suspicion that Britain secretly welcomes 
agitation against partition which will enable it 
bury the plan it has itself originated. This impression 
could only have been strengthened by the terms of 4 
British White Paper published on January 4, which 
fixed the terms of reference for the new commis 
sion. Disclaiming support for any scheme of com 


***Britain Proposes Division of Palestine,"’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, July \ 
1937; also ‘‘Palestine Arabs Rebel Against Britain,’ jsid., October 22, 1937 


(Continued on Page 4) 


- plan of 
era in the 
the Com. 
ry, its 
Minis 
e Anglo 
in pledge 
mbarrass. 
have boy. 
April 27, 
Arab ter. 
arently in 
would be 
nstrations 
in Egypt, 
- of anth 
of British 
hat peace 
EXCESSIVE 
therto ey 
Jewish na- 
may be 


MMission, 
dhead, are 
‘oblems of 
t has now 
ith toll of 
e-establish 
press law. 
nended dé 
vish and 4 
aders have 
m of mil- 
lice dogs 
rist bands. 
agoresson 
on of the 

with ut 
aj Amine 
ities from 
he recruits 
ducts ant 
> surround 


ndoubtedly 
nay be due 
y welcomes 
nable it t0 
impression 
terms of 4 
ry 4, which 
w commis 
ne of com 


Bulletin, July 16 
\ctober 22, 193% 


Washington News Letter 


—_— 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 

JUNE 1.—Eyes on Latin America. Washington 
oficials are feeling less “jittery” concerning the 
effectiveness of fascist propaganda in Latin America. 
It is recognized that Brazil—with an immense area, 
the largest population in the southern continent, and 
a wealth of natural resources—offers the most tempt- 
ing field for German and Italian penetration. Here, 
it has been believed, was the most likely place where 
the Monroe Doctrine might be put to a test. But it 
is precisely in Brazil that Germany has recently over- 
reached itself. The nationalistic dictatorship of 
Getulio Vargas is little disposed to permit Nazi 
agents to use the numerous colony of their fellow- 
nationals in Brazil for extension of German influ- 
ence. While the Brazilian government has not sus- 
tained with specific accusations its charge that the 
putsch of May 11 had foreign backing, observers in 
the country report that the failure of the revolt 
brought a distinct loss of prestige for the fascist 
powers. 

Meanwhile, Washington is actively pushing its 
plans for Western Hemisphere rapprochement. An 
important move toward improvement of communi- 
cations was forecast in the announcement by the 
Maritime Commission that about September 1 a new 
and “‘unexcelled” steamship service would be opened 
down the east coast of South America, by luxury- 
liners operating between New York and Rio, Mon- 
tevideo and Buenos Aires. As a gesture of good-will, 
it is reported that the names of the vessels may be 
changed from the Virginia, the Pennsylvania and the 
California, to the Brazil, the Argentina and the 
Uruguay. An active program for inter-American cul- 
tural exchange is also taking shape, which will in- 
clude creation within the Department of State of a 
new Division of Cultural Relations. Officials em- 
phasize that this program will eschew the guise of 
counter-propaganda to that of the fascist states, and 
instead will orient its activities toward the creation 
of more complete and better rounded inter-American 
understanding. 


Examination of recent trade trends may have 
helped to create greater optimism in government 
circles. United States exports to Latin America for 
the first three months of 1938 were larger in value 
than in the corresponding period for 1937. True, 
Statistics also reveal the increase of German trade 
with Brazil. In 1936 Germany displaced the United 


States as the chief source of imports for that country, 
and further improved its position in 1937. But the 
very importance of this commerce for the Reich in- 
clines some Washington officials to believe that Ber- 
lin will think twice before permitting hopes of 
political and cultural penetration in Brazil to en- 
danger its advantageous trade position. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


Naval Maneuvers and Foreign Policy. A routine 
announcement by the Navy Department om May 26 
that ‘Fleet Problem No. 20 will be held during the 
month of February in the West Indies amd the At- 
lantic Ocean at least as far south as the Equator’ 
is regarded by observers here as an item of major 
importance, affording another clue to American for- 
eign policy. ““The fleet,” the announcement said, “is 
expected to sail from the west coast of the United 
States early in January, hold the fleet problem in 
February, conduct exercises from Guantanamo as a 
base in March and April, visit the New York expo- 
sition in May and then return to the Pacific.” The 
maneuvers will take the fleet to the Atlantic for the 
first time in five years. 


This decision, which has the approval of President 
Roosevelt and Secretary Hull, clearly underlines the 
current trend of the Administration’s policy. When 
Mr. Hull declined to lift the Spanish embargo a few 
weeks ago, he tacitly admitted that the shift in Brit- 
ish policy had forced a reorientation in Washington. 
For the time being, at least, the Administration has 
been compelled to abandon any thought of positive 
action in the Far East. Simultaneously, however, it 
has sought to fortify our future strategic position 
in the Pacific, while strengthening political and eco- 
nomic ties in Latin America. Thus on May 28, at the 
same time that Mr. Hull issued his cautious reminder 
that the Kellogg Pact “is no less binding now than 
when it was entered into,” the navy served warning 
that the United States is prepared to uphold the 
Monroe Doctrine and to resist encroachment any- 
where in the Western Hemisphere. 

In operating “‘at least as far south as the Equator,” 
the fleet will move into the waters between Brazil 
and Africa. Thus, besides testing Panama Canal 
defenses, and maneuvering in the Caribbean, the 
navy will have an opportunity to impress South 
American—and European—nations with American 
armed strength in the Western Hemisphere. 


Funds appropriated for the navy during the cur- 


Fie eka gc oo PE sage 2S ey SS eee 
a 7. as a re harass 7 = ee 


po it fein nn a 


rent session total $596,339,500—including estimates 
of $49,473,500 for navy purposes in the second 
deficiency appropriations bill. Authorization meas- 
ures, including a supplementary authorization of 
$28,351,000 now pending, total an additional $1,- 
184,351,000. Analyzing the allocation of these funds, 
observers find no evidence pointing toward use of 
the navy in the Western Pacific in the near future. 
What is apparent, however, is that the American 
strategic area in the Pacific is being gradually ex- 
tended to the north, south and west. Pending meas- 
ures call for establishment of three strategic air 
bases, one in Hawaii, another at Kodiak in the 
Aleutian Islands, and a third at Midway Island. 
Graving docks are contemplated at Pearl Harbor, 
Hawaii, and at Seattle. This program supports Ad- 
miral Leahy’s significant statement that the defense 
line in the Pacific now extends from the Aleutians 
to Samoa, which lies 2,600 miles southwest of 
Hawaii, and thence to the Panama Canal. 
SIMON BourRGIN 


CRISIS IN PALESTINE 
(Continued from Page 2) 


pulsory transfer of the Arab minority of 45 per cent 
from the proposed Jewish state to the Arab area, the 
British government, in the White Paper, stressed 
the length of time needed for elaboration of a com- 
plete plan of partition and hinted at the necessity for 
transitional arrangements. Like the Arabs, the mi- 
nority in the Zionist Organization which opposes par- 
tition, and demands full implementation of the 


Page Four — 


Balfour Declaration and the Mandate, has drawp 
new strength from this apparent sign of continuing 
delay and uncertainty. 

As the devastating effects of prolonged unrest take 
their toll of security and prosperity in the country, 
Arab moderates have come forward with schemes 
which, while not new, embody possible alternatives 
to the present unsatisfactory state of affairs and the 
uncharted dangers of partition. The Emir Abdullah 
of Transjordan has proposed an interim settlement 
within a new mandated territory including both Pal. 
estine and his own country. Under his plan, Jews 
would be guaranteed full minority rights and facili- 
ties for immigration in zones where Jews were al- 
ready living. If, after ten years, it were discovered 
that Jews and Arabs could not participate in a 
self-governing state, partition would still remain 4 
possibility. A somewhat similar proposal has bees 
made by Ragheb Bey Nashashibi, outstanding rival 
of Haj Amin el Husseini in the Arab political sphere, 
If Zionist statesmanship could possibly abandon the 
shibboleth of an independent Jewish State and un 
dertake negotiations on some such basis as this, peace 
might eventually be re-established between two 
peoples whose cooperation can only benefit the 
Middle East. Any moves toward an Arab-Jewish rap- 
prochement would also ease the task of the intergov- 
ernmental committee appointed to facilitate the emi- 
gration of political refugees from Germany and Aus: 
tria, which meets at Evian-les-Bains, France, on July 6. 

Davin H. Popper 


The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Japan in Transition, by Emil Lederer and Emy Lederer- 
Seidler. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1938. $3.00 


The authors have produced a rich and informative study 
of ‘the background elements in Japan’s culture and civiliza- 
tion. Modernization is shown to have left unaffected wide 
areas of Japanese life, many aspects of which still carry 
on in traditional behavior patterns. The stubborn persis- 
tence of older habits of life complicates Japan’s epoch of 
transition, intensifies conflict arising from efforts to adapt 
to Western ways, and produces a crisis which has still to 
be resolved. 


Chatham House, by Stephen King-Hall. 
ford University Press, 1937. $2.00 
A brief and interesting account of the Royal Institute 

of International Affairs, which since its establishment in 

1920 has provided 102 publications, innumerable public 

meetings and study groups, a large library and informa- 

tion center, and affiliated institutes in the Dominions and 

India. 

Geneva versus Peace, by the Comte de Saint-Aulaire. New 
York, Sheed and Ward, 1937. $2.50 


An incredibly fustian attack on the League of Nations, 
by a former French Ambassador to Great Britain. 


New York, Ox- 


Propaganda from China and Japan, by Bruno Lasker and 
Agnes Roman. New York, American Council, Institute 
of Pacific Relations, 1938. $1.50 


Using Chinese and Japanese materials circulated in the 
United States, the authors have contributed an interesting 
case study of the propaganda techniques employed by both 
sides in the current Sino-Japanese conflict. 


Communism, Fascism or Democracy? by Eduard Heimann, 
New York, W. W. Norton and Company, 1938. $2.50 
A careful sociological treatment, in broad theory, of these 

modern state forms. The author attributes the rise of 
communism and fascism to maladjustments incidental to 
the development of capitalism, and asks whether these 
maladjustments can be corrected through a “modernized 
democracy.” 


My Austria, by Kurt Schuschnigg. New York, Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1938. $3.00 
This book is interesting as an exposition of the view! 
of Austria’s former Chancellor. Its account of the crucial 
events of Schuschnigg’s period of office, however, is inade 
quate and actually throws little new light on any of them 


— 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 32, Jung 3, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Leste BuELL, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MicHetes Dran, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office ac New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


ER 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


An 


| 


T 
peac 
fore 
unit 
Sinc 
unti 
the 
fo Ss 
peas 

F 
in tl 
on ° 
neg. 
deve 
effec 
war 
vidi 
fact: 
mad 
cept 
vem 
wra! 
tion 
una 
witl 
sion 
unte 
be c! 
re-e: 
of t 


