





oS Se) SN 


a . ™ We «he we 
sweety 74 MACUL SSR 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


AUG 22 194) 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











abil. 

viet An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 

able FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 

a 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 

| the 

ting | ja. XX, No. 44 Avaust 22, 1941 

the 

7 ROOSEVELT AND CHURCHILL AGREE ON STEPS TO CHECK AGGRESSION 
ih) 

ladi: } THE return of President Roosevelt and Prime 





wiet | 4 Minister Churchill to their respective capitals, on 
“LOss | August 17 and 19, cleared the way for the series of 
be | important American and British measures which are 
han- pected to follow the epochal meeting of the two 
Sea | government leaders at sea. Wiile the major accom- 
icult plishments of the meeting have not yet been re- 
» So. vealed, its main purpose apparently was to enable 
d of the President and the British Prime Minister to dis- 
lling uss specific and effective means of stopping the 
cked | Nazi war machine. This goal was suggested in the 
joint Roosevelt-Churchill declaration of principles on 
__ | August 14, which referred to “the final destruction 
- the | of the Nazi tyranny.” 
1 the! PEACE AIMS. The joint declaration, which first 
with | snnounced the mid-Atlantic conferences, embodied 
eeks. | in eight points the most forceful and definite state- 
144" | ment of British and American peace aims made dur- 
tate: | ing the war. The first three points, covering political 
lead- aims, state that (1) Britain and the United States 
1d0f, | "sek no aggrandizement, territorial or other”; de- 
yma} nounce (2) territorial changes “that do not accord 
sand) with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples con- 
id 0} med”; and call for (3) the restoration of sov- 
slat eign rights and self-government “to those who 
es DY have been forcibly deprived of them.” The economic 
to) ind social aims pledge the two democracies to 
struggle for (4) “the enjoyment by all States . . . of 
r, not} acess, on equal terms, to the trade and to the raw 
paign} Materials of the world”; and encourage (5) inter- 
istem)) National collaboration to secure “improved labor 
. Tht) standards, economic adjustment and social security.” 
ng tv) Some form of international organization was fore- 
g the} shadowed in the expressed desire to promote (6) 
from} the establishment of a durable peace which will af- 
Japan} ford all nations and all men the means of living in 
ly 56} Safety without fear and want. In support of these 
objectives, Britain and the United States jointly 
EN | tampion (7) freedom of the seas for all countries; 











and, denouncing the use of force, demand (8) the 
disarmament of aggressive nations “pending the 
establishment of a wider and permanent system of 
general security.” 

This statement of principles is much less specific 
than President Wilson’s enunciation of the historic 
“Fourteen Points” in 1918, but its general objectives 
are strikingly similar to those of the World War 
document. Like the Wilson statement, it is probably 
designed in part to bolster morale and resistance in 
the countries under German domination, and to per- 
suade the German people that they will also enjoy 
the right of self-determination after the war. The 
Roosevelt-Churchill declaration serves, moreover, as 
a definite warning to the Reich that the democratic 
powers are determined to continue fighting until 
Germany is vanquished. Finally, the joint enuncia- 
tion of peace aims insures that the United States will 
participate in the post-war settlement. 

The British-American declaration clearly recog- 
nizes that both governments have world-wide social, 
economic and political interests which are threat- 
ened by the expansion of Nazi Germany and its 
associated totalitarian countries. Active measures to 
check this expansion in the near future were indi- 
cated by the White House statement which accom- 
panied the declaration on August 14. The President 
and the Prime Minister, it said, had further exam- 
ined the whole problem of supplying munitions of 
war to ‘those countries actively engaged in resisting 
aggression,” and had “made clear the steps which 
their countries are respectively taking for their safe- 
ty’ in the face of totalitarian policies of military 
domination. 

ACTIVE MEASURES TO CHECK AGGRES- 
SION. President Roosevelt and Prime Minister 
Churchill promptly implemented their conferences 
with a joint message to Soviet Premier Stalin on Au- 
gust 15, proposing that high British and American 























representatives meet with Stalin in Moscow to discuss 
directly and “arrive at speedy decisions as to the ap- 
portionment of our joint resources.” Britain and the 
United States, it was pointed out, are now cooperating 
to provide “the very maximum of supplies” needed 
by the U.S.S.R., and will “continue to send supplies 
and material as rapidly as possible.” Premier Stalin's 
acceptance of the proposal for a war-aid confer- 
ence, announced on August 16, pledged full coop- 
eration to hold the meeting in Moscow without 
delay. Two hours later Britain and the U.S.S.R. 
climaxed almost two months of negotiations by 
signing a war-trade agreement covering exchange of 
goods and clearing arrangements between the two 
countries, and providing for a British credit of £10,- 
000,000 to enable the Soviet Union to pay for the 
balance of British exports over imports. While no 
emergency trade pact has yet been concluded between 
the United States and the U.S.S.R., it is anticipated 
that American war materials will flow into Russia 
with increasing rapidity through the Far Eastern port 
of Vladivostok. Since the use of this Soviet port 
could be prevented by Japanese action, Roosevelt and 
Churchill probably also discussed possible Anglo- 
American cooperation against Japan in the Far East. 


NAZI MOVES IN THE MIDDLE EAST. The 
need for urgent action at this time has been empha- 
sized by recent Nazi successes in the Ukraine, and the 
development of a perilous situation in Iran. The Ger- 
man drive has already passed the U.S.S.R.’s vital 
southern port of Odessa and led to the seizure, on Au- 
gust 17, of the important Black Sea naval base at 
Nikolaev. In Iran, the alleged presence of about 
three thousand Nazi agents has prompted simultane- 
ous British and Soviet diplomatic action. After sev- 
eral months of negotiations between British and 
Iranian officials regarding Nazi activities, London 
and Moscow each delivered friendly warnings to the 
Teheran government during the second week in Au- 
gust. These steps were followed by a stern joint 
Anglo-Soviet warning announced in London on 





Read about developments in Chinese and Japanese 
internal affairs: 


JAPAN’S “NEW STRUCTURE” 


CHINA’S NATIONAL FRONT 
by T. A. Bisson 


25¢ each 





Page Two 





April 15 and July 15 issues of Foreign Policy Reports 











——— 


August 17. In view of Britain’s decisive military a¢ 
tion to counter the Nazi-inspired coup in Iraq jg 
May, stronger measures may soon be expected unles 
the Iranian government gives adequate assurang 
that all menacing Nazi activities will be curtailed 
The entrance of British troops into Iran would be, 
significant step both toward protection of Britain's 
extensive interests in India, and toward eventual mili. 
tary aid to the U.S.SR. in its life-and-death struggle 
with Germany. In the Middle East Britain may again 
find itself face to face with Nazi land forces and, by 
absorbing some of Germany's military pressure jg 
the south, may strengthen Russia’s will and power 
to resist. 





A. RANDLE ELLiotr 








I Saw England, by Ben Robertson. New York, Knopf, 194), 
$2.00 ‘ 
Praise for Britain’s conduct under Nazi air attack, by 

the London correspondent of the New York newspaper PV, 


Latin American Trade: How to Get It and Hold It, by 
Frank Henius. New York, Harper, 1941. $2.00 


The author, who has had much practical experience jn | 
foreign trade, gives some sound, commun-sense advice o | 
methods of promoting our commerce with Latin America, 


Problems of the Pacific, 1939, edited by Kate Mitchell and 
W. L. Holland. New York, Institute of Pacific Relations, 
1940. $3.50 


A detailed summary of the discussions of the Virginia 
Beach conference of the Institute of Pacific Relations, in 
which representatives from eight of the Institute’s | 
tional Councils participated. The informative record d 
the conference proceedings is supplemented by extensive 
documentary appendices on American rights and interests 
in China, the future of foreign investment in China, and 
the foreign relations of the Netherlands Indies. 


Pilsudski, by Alexandra Pilsudska. New York, Dodd, Mead, 
1941. 3.00 


The best portions of this biography of the Polish dic 
tator, written by his wife, depict her exciting experiences 
as a nationalist agitator in pre-1914 Russian Poland, ani 
as a fugitive during the German campaign of September 
1939. The material on Pilsudski himself is formal ani 
stilted. 


Mine and Countermine, by A. M. Low. New York, Sheridan 
House, 1940. $2.75 


The best available source for the history and description 
of mine warfare and the measures which have been taken 
to minimize its effects. The book makes surprisingly inter- 
esting reading. 


Winged Warfare, by Major General H. H. Arnold ani 
Colonel Ira C. Eaker. New York, Harper, 1941. $3.00 


Two high Army Air Corps officers give a good, nob 
technical description of modern military aviation and 
the organization and functions of the United States Army | 
Air Corps. While a few statements in the book may be chal 
lenged as inaccurate, and the value of some sections 3) 
diminished by official reticence, it should be of the greatest 
help to laymen interested in the subject. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Ve!. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


ee 5) 


XX, No. 44, AuGust 22, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dornoruy F. Leger, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Bile 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Incorporated. 


) 


| 


Nation | 





Set 
Nazi 
led te 
gress 
lowit 


| whicl 


Berli 
Chan 
pant 
lat f 
repo! 
prov! 
prop 
the - 
popu 


civil 


Lat 
by 
bol 

f 
tua 
Lat 
ten 








228 @ 5-8 II 


Sensational disclosures during the past month of 
s| Nazi intrigue in Bolivia, Chile, and Colombia have 
mili. | Jed to a popular demand in those countries for con- 
ggle | gressional investigation of subversive activities. Fol- 
pain | jowing the failure of an alleged Nazi plot in Bolivia, 
1, by | which involved the Bolivian Military Attaché in 
€ in| Berlin and the German Minister in La Paz, the 
ower | Chamber of Deputies resolved on August 12 to or- 
rr | ganize a six-man committee of investigation. A simi- 
lar proposal is being put forward in Chile, where 
reports are rife of intrigue in German-populated 
provinces of the south. In Colombia, charges of Nazi 
propaganda in the Army are being investigated by 
-py,| the Minister of War, although there is growing 
popular sentiment for bringing the inquiry under 
dvilian control. 


ee in} In one major South American country, Argentina, 
ries, , 2 Congressional committee of investigation has al- 
ready been functioning for several months. Headed 
by the energetic young Radical Deputy, Rail Da- 
monte Taborda, this committee has been making 
uneven headway in the face of obstructionist tactics 
<a by the Argentine government. A fortunate occurrence 
rd of| for the committee was the recent discovery, in the 
ensive| pouches of a German diplomatic courier traveling 
eres) between Lima and Buenos Aires, of a short-wave 
a, and ‘ : . 

radio set. Confiscation of the set by Argentine au- 
thorities led to a three-cornered struggle between 
the executive, the committee, and the German Em- 
h die bassy, in which the latter came out a poor third. 
iene! There are indications at present that the Argentine 
i. government, in response to popular sentiment, is 
developing a more cooperative attitude with respect 
to the investigations in progress. 


Mead, 


i] and 


eridat) The recent wave of plots, real or alleged, and the 


measures taken to combat them, suggest two possi- 
bilities. Either Nazi agents in Latin America, ren- 
dered desperate by the decreasing tempo of German 
victories abroad and the accelerated rhythm of U.S. 
preparation, are throwing caution to the winds in an 
attempt to achieve spectacular successes; or else the 
Latin American governments themselves, heartened 
by these same factors, are going after plotters more 
boldly than they would previously have dared. 
ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WAR. On the ac- 
tual issue of the war, however, official attitudes of the 
| Latin American governments vary widely. The pre- 
, Béi. | “nse of neutrality has been largely abandoned in 


ription 
taken 
 inter- 


ld and 
53.00 

|, non 
and af | 
| Army 
ye chal- 
ions is 
reatest 





By JOHN I. B. McCULLOCH 


Mexico, the Central American states, and the island 
republics of the Caribbean—in other words, in that 
bloc of countries most directly within the military 
and economic sphere of the United States. Here, the 
United States lead is being closely watched and fre- 
quently followed. Cuba, for example, has just ex- 
pelled the last German consul left in that republic; 
Italian consulates had already been closed. There is 
much support in Mexico for a similar step. In Hon- 
duras, a presidential decree bars Axis* sympathizers 
from government jobs. Of particular significance is 
a recent speech by President Eduardo Santos’ of 
Colombia, challenging the concept of frigid neutral- 
ity, and denying that weak nations can avoid danger 
by merely turning their backs on it. 


Official attitudes in the southern half of the South 
American continent reveal considerably greater re- 
serve. Recently, Argentina requested both the British 
and German Embassies to moderate the tone of their 
propaganda. Chile, several days later, barred all 
propaganda whatsoever from the radio. It is worth 
noting that Argentina and Chile are two of the four 
countries (Peru and Colombia being the others) 
which declined, or accepted with reservations, a sug- 
gestion of the Uruguayan Foreign Office which 
would have guaranteed non-belligerent status (hence 
free use of ports, etc.) to any American republic at 
war with a non-American state. 


The dramatic meeting of President Roosevelt and 
Prime Minister Churchill on the high seas, and the 
subsequent announcement of joint British-U.S. peace 
aims, will undoubtedly make a strong appeal to 
imagination of the Latin Americans. The program 
put forward by the two statesmen has been described 
by Mexican Foreign Minister Padilla as representing 
the will of America. In Buenos Aires the general 
sentiment appears to have been admiration for a 
statesmanlike document, coupled with relief that the 
meeting on the Atlantic did not mean—as many Ar- 
gentinians had feared—immediate entrance of the 
United States into the war. 





F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: IMPRESSIONS OF LATIN AMERICA 
Speaker: Vera Micheles Dean 
Date: Sunday, August 24 
Time: 2:15 p.m., E.D.S.T. 
Station: NBC, blue network 











For more extensive coverage on Latin American affairs, read PAN AMERICAN NEWS, 4 bi-weekly newsletter edited by Mr. McCulloch. For sample 
copy of this publication, write to the Washington Bureau, Foreign Policy Association, 1200 National Press Building, Washington, D.C. 


Pe ORS OT aE 


; 


i 
q 
i 
i 
i 
a 








Washington News Letter 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


AuG. 19.—Now that the President has returned 
to Washington, the capital is speculating about the 
steps which will presumably be taken to implement 
the agreements reached in the historic Roosevelt- 
Churchill conference. Since the President has denied 
that the meeting has brought the nation closer to 
armed participation in the war, the forthcoming de- 
cisions will probably take the form of measures 
accelerating the defense program and adjusting the 
allocation of arms to the new conditions prevailing 
abroad. 


STATUS OF DEFENSE PRODUCTION. While 
Congress is generally expected to approve the request 
for additional lend-lease funds which the White 
House will send to Capitol Hill in the near future, the 
real question is whether enough war material can be 
produced to meet the needs of the Soviet Union and 
China, as well as of the British Empire and the 
United States. The output of munitions in this coun- 
try during the second half of 1941 will undoubtedly 
be much larger than in the first half. The construc- 
tion and tooling of new plants has made great pro- 
gress. During the first six months of the current 
year machine-tool production aggregated $346,900,- 
000, as compared with a total of $425,000,000 in all 
of 1940. A substantial increase in the manufacture of 
light arms, explosives, artillery, tanks and planes can 
therefore be expected. At the same time, require- 
ments are increasing far beyond original expectations. 
German conquest of vital industrial regions in the 
Ukraine, for example, will raise enormously Russian 
demands for American supplies. 


Moreover, defense production in the United States 
has lagged in some respects. Output of aircraft, 
which amounted to 1,460 during July, is more than 
100 planes behind schedule. The heavy-bomber pro- 
gram has proved particularly disappointing, partly 
because participation of the automobile industry in 
the program has not worked out as expected. In 
general, Washington detects a tendency to slacken the 
pace of production on the unfounded assumption 
that the emergency is no longer as acute as earlier in 
the year. 


NEED FOR CLEAR LEADERSHIP. Presidential 
action is believed necessary not only to impart new 
energy to the defense program, but also to guide it 
through the critical period it is now entering. This 





| 
country has reached the stage in which further expan, 
sion of munitions production can be achieved only 
the expense of drastic curtailment of civilian outpy 
The rapid multiplication of priority controls during | ™ 
the last few months has characterized the transition, | 

It has brought the danger of inflation to the fore and 

is forcing the government to decide where and tp 
what extent non-defense production shall be reduced, 





VoL. 

Under existing circumstances critics of the defense 
program consider unified leadership more essential 
than ever. While the President’s adviser, Justice Sam. | 
uel I. Rosenman, is said to have been studying the 
organizational set-up for defense, skeptics doubt that | ~ 
the conflicts in jurisdiction and policies among de. | -y~ 
fense agencies will be effectively eliminated. Recently E 
the rivalry between OPM and OPACS has been most | yt} 
acute. Their respective spheres have never been cleat | pyr, 
ly delimited and their chiefs—Mr. Knudsen and Mr. | o¢ 
Henderson — have a fundamentally different ap-| 4; 
proach to the entire problem of defense production. | 4,4; 
Conservatives tax Mr. Henderson with ambitions to 
arrogate leadership of the program to himself. 


Mrs 





was 
west 
TRANSPORTATION DIFFICULTIES. The de} 
livery as well as the manufacture of war materials is = 
expected to confront the Administration with serious | ? “ 

difficulties. The task of supplying the U.S.S.R. across ‘ 
the vast Pacific, for example, puts a heavy additional pa 
burden on shipping facilities. Although planes may “a 
be flown across the Atlantic and Pacific (witness the| ”* ‘ 
establishment of a new ferry service from the U.S. to | ™ 
the Near East announced by the President on August pe 
19), other munitions must be transported by vessel. hie 
Merchant marine losses have been reduced from| “”” 
498,000 tons in May to 329,296 in June and a still) 
smaller tonnage in July, but these totals are still da- 
gerously high since U.S. yards built only 386,684) "™ 
tons of merchant shipping in the first half of 1941) F 
Considerable progress has been made in shipbuild-} pre 
ing techniques. Construction time per ship is being} ig 
reduced to four-and-a-half or five months, which) itis 
compares with a record of seven months and twenty | con 
four days set in the first World War. Although out | We 
put is ahead of schedule, it is not expected to out. thei 
distance current shipping losses until well along m) ptt 
1942. Meanwhile, the need to cut sinkings and to| dus 
protect shipments to Vladivostok from possible jap | a 1 
anese action may provoke a ‘‘shooting war’’ soonet) obt 
than the country expects. mir 
JOHN C. DEWILDE | Ma 








