


fool Nd 





Two 
irlan 
reral 
| his 
n he 
1 the 
se of 
ench 
lida- 
and 
ured 
lieu, 
and 
- the 
se on 
their 


TT 


mpts 
$ in- 
The 
empt 
pro- 
ough 
ts re- 
t you 
eeply 








PBRIGDICAL ROCA 
GENERAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MICH. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


DEC 28 1942 


es a - te. eT am 
"we wats 0. m.COULZ9GN . 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 10 


DECEMBER 25, 1942 





GRAVE POLITICAL DECISIONS CONFRONT ALLIES IN EUROPE 


— the Russians press their new offensive 
in the region of the Don, and the outcome in 
Tunisia continues to hinge on the relative air 
strength the Allies and the Axis can amass in that 
theatre of war, it becomes increasingly evident that 
the United Nations will have to reach some measure 


| of agreement concerning the political situation in 


>  ———————— 


Europe before they can capitalize on their newly 
gained advantages. It is not possible now, nor, at 
this stage of the conflict, would it be desirable, to 
formulate the details of the post-war settlement in 
Europe. What is urgently needed is a consensus 
among the United Nations as to the ultimate politi- 
cal objectives they hope to achieve through military 
victory. Without such consensus, there is the gravest 
danger that defeat of Germany will merely be 
the prelude to an indefinite period of civil war 
within the liberated countries of Europe, and of 
clashes between Britain, Russia and the United States 
concerning the future political organization of the 
continent. 

YUGOSLAVIA IN TURMOIL. Indications of 
the serious rifts that are developing among the 
peoples of Europe, at the very time when their ef- 
forts should be concentrated on the task of under- 
mining the Nazi system from within, multiply day 
by day. The internal crisis that is rending Yugo- 
slavia is but a portent of what may occur in other 
countries conquered by the Nazis which, before Hit- 
ler's advent to power, had not achieved national 
cohesion or, having achieved it centuries earlier, 
had begun to show signs of disintegration. Reports 
—stemming chiefly from Moscow —assert that 
General Mikhailovitch, previously acclaimed in 
Britain and the United States as leader of the 
Chetnik guerrillas, has developed pro-Axis sym- 
pathies, and accuse him of favoring the forma- 
tion after the war of a Greater Serbia, as opposed 
to the demands of Croats and Slovenes for partici- 


pation on terms of equality with the Serbs in post-war 
Yugoslavia. It is also said that, instead of using the 
forces under his command, he is saving them to 
build up his own power after the war. Meanwhile, 
British and other sources claim that General Mik- 
hailovitch—who has the support of the Yugoslav 
government in London—resents the increasing activi- 
ties of another group of guerrilla warriors, the 
Partisans, who are said to be receiving guidance and 
support from Moscow, although it is admitted that 
not all the men in their ranks are by any means pro- 
Communist. On the contrary, it would — that 
among the Partisans there are many who find Gen- 
eral Mikhailovitch not sufficiently aggressive, or who 
resent his allegedly pro-Serb views. General Mik- 
hailovitch, according to the British, is not pro-Axis 
but is biding his time until he can give aid to an 
invading Allied force. 

FERMENT OF REVOLUTION. In the absence 
of trustworthy information about internal clashes in 
Yugoslavia, it would seem wise to suspend judg- 
ment about the merits of the claims advanced by the 
various groups. In Yugoslavia resistance to the Axis 
is superimposed, so to speak, on two fundamental 
trends: an internal conflict between Serbs and Croats 
that had existed since the union of the two peoples 
in one state in 1919; and a growing cleavage, which 
may be assuming the scope of revolution, between 
peasants and intellectuals (many of whom are tra- 
ditionally pro-Russian) on the one hand, and rep- 
resentatives of the old feudal system of landlords, 
bureaucracy, and monarchy on the other, many of 
whom had been openly anti-Soviet. Defeat of Hitler 
would not automatically remedy these conflicts or 
heal these cleavages. It is entirely possible that revo- 
lutions similar in character to that which occurred 
in Russia in 1917 may take place in the backward, 
primarily agricultural and raw-material-producing 
countries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans—not 











—____—_—_—_—_—_——=[{[_—_—_—_—_—_—_—_==—>_ Page Two 


because of the propaganda of native Communists or 
direction from Moscow, but because the war brought 
to a head economic and social conditions that had 
been ripe for an upheaval. 

DILEMMA OF ALLIES. The dilemma that con- 
fronts the United Nations is whether they should 
now make a choice between -the conflicting elements 
in the occupied countries, giving their blessing to 
one group (and thus inviting the curses of the 
others); or, on the contrary, decline to intervene in 
these internal conflicts, and proceed with the task of 
tnilitary occupation whenever that becomes feasible, 
leaving military commanders in the field free to de- 
cide what individuals should be vested with civil 
authority until such time as a general settlement can 
be discussed. The democratic formula, and the one 
sanctioned by the Atlantic Charter, is that the peoples 
of the occupied countries shall freely choose their 
own governments once they have been liberated from 
Nazi rule. But will the peoples of liberated coun- 
tries be in a state of mind to elect their own govern- 
ments? Or will the defeat of Germany merely un- 
leash all the old passions that, to some extent at 
least, had been kept in check by the prevailing de- 
sire to resist Hitler? And when these passions break 
loose, as they already have in Yugoslavia, will a 
serious difference of opinion develop between Britain, 
the United States and Russia as to the general trend 
that should be encouraged in any given country by 
the recognition of one type of government in prefer- 
ence to another ? 

This is not an academic question, but one of im- 
mediate urgency. There is a growing danger that 











—= 


Britain and the United States may become associate 
in the minds of Europeans with representatives of 
the old order in Europe who, having failed to pr. 
vent the catastrophe of war, are already squabbling 
over the spoils of victory. It is understandable thy 
Britain and the United States should want to maig. 
tain as much continuity as possible in the politic) 
life of Europe, but Hitler's ruthless conquests may 
have made resumption of life at the point where j 
was interrupted impossible; and it may be that the 
Western democracies can make their most effectiye 
contribution to post-war reconstruction by taking x 
their starting-point not conditions as they existed ig 
1939, but as they exist today. Perhaps the only way 
to avoid a series of civil wars and inter-Allied clashes 
that would destroy what is left of Europe is to plan 
now for military administration of all of liberated 
Europe by the United Nations for a specific period, 
During that period it might prove possible to carry) 
out measures of relief and rehabilitation that would | 
prepare the peoples of conquered countries to make 
a relatively dispassionate choice regarding their fu 
ture political régimes, instead of thrusting this re) 
sponsibility on them when they are not in a state 
of mind to fulfill it. The military representatives of ) 
the United Nations, however, must have a general | 
policy to guide their decisions before and after they | 
enter countries now occupied by the Nazis if thei } 
military operations are not to be jeopardized by politi | 
cal convulsions throughout the continent. | 


VERA MICHELES DEAN | 








(The first of four articles by Mrs. Dean on the 


reorganization of Europe.) 


IS CHILE NEARING BREAK WITH AXIS? 


The arrival in Washington, on December 11, of 
Sefior Radl Morales Beltrani, Chilean Minister of 
the Interior, again raises the question of Chile's po- 
sition in the war. With the Allied successes in North 
Africa and the Solomons, it seemed that severance 
of diplomatic relations with the Axis might have 
been expected on the part of Chile and Argentina, 
the only nations on the continent still maintaining 
such ties. The drive for complete hemisphere solidar- 
ity, however, moves slowly. A year after Pearl Har- 





What is the role of the “governments-in-exile”? 
Are they helping the United Nations’ war effort? 
Are they in contact with their conquered peoples? 
What are their post-war plans? Read— 


ALLIED GOVERNMENTS IN LONDON—War 
Efforts and Peace Aims _ by Winifred N. Hadsel 


25c 


December 15 issue of ForEIGN PoLticy REPORTS 


Reports are published on the 1st and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5 a year; to FPA members $3. 











} 
bor, and at least eleven months after the 19 other 
American Republics broke off relations with Ger 
many, Italy and Japan, Axis diplomats are still free > 
to move about and act in the interest of their gov 
ernments in two important South American countries. 


CHILE STRIKES AT AXIS AGENTS. Although 
no fundamental change has yet occurred, Chile has 
taken important steps recently to curb Axis espionage | 
and sabotage activities. On November 5 the Chilean 
government ordered the expulsion of one Italian and 
eleven German agents for spying. On the same day, 
a mass demonstration which supported the United 
Nations and called for a break with the Axis took 
place in Santiago. This happened two days after the 
Inter-American Emergency Committee for Political 
Defense of the Continent at Montevideo had de | 
cided to publish a memorandum presented fout | 
months before, on June 30, to the Chilean Executive 
by United States Ambassador Claude G. Bowers, ¢ 
posing the machinations of German spies and sabo 
teurs in Chile. The fact that this document was not 


— 6 


oO 





— 
ciated 
ves of 
tO pre. 
bbling 
le that 
Main. 
litical} 
ts may 
here it 
1at the 
Tective 
ing as 
sted ip 
ly way 
clashes 
© plan 
erated 
period, | 
> Carty 
would 
) make 
eir fu. 
his te- | 
a State | 
ives of } 
reneral 
er they 
f their } 
polit | 


| 


} 
) other | 
h Ger 
ill free > 
if gov- 
intries. 





EAN 





though | 
ile has 
onage | 
“hilean 
an and 
ne day, | 
United 
is took | 
‘ter the | 
‘olitical 
ad de- | 
d fout | 
ecutive 
ers, ex 
d sabo- 


Vas not 








——e 
—————" 


made public earlier explains the confusion of Chilean 
public opinion during preceding months.* 

Secret discussions and long debates followed pres- 
entation of the United States memorandum, which 
proved conclusively that a well-organized group of 
spies sent secret radio messages to Germany covering 
the arrival and departure of Allied ships, and indi- 
cated that the Air Attaché of the German Embassy 
at Santiago, Ludwig von Bohlen, was one of the 
organizers of the group. 





In spite of this conclusive evidence, for over 
four months nothing was done. After the document 
had been published, the Chilean government ar- 
rested a group of Axis agents, but took no further 
steps at the time. Concerned chiefly with the fate of 
its merchant fleet, now doing a record business, and 
the difficulty of defending its long and vulnerable 
coast line, Chile apparently still hesitates to break 
definitely with the Axis. Japanese threats, expressed 
as late as November 18, to destroy Chilean shipping 
should Chile abandon its neutrality may have played 
their part. Yet application of the Rio de Janeiro agree- 
ments, which call for severance of diplomatic and 
economic relations with the three main Axis powers 
by all American nations, cannot be postponed in- 
definitely. Sooner or later, the last two neutrals in 
America will either have to break off relations or 
withdraw from the hemisphere coalition. Chilean 
President Rios recognized this fact on November 23, 
when he declared that, “if present methods are in- 
sufficient, Chile will go so far as to break with the 
Axis in order to aid the democratic cause.” 

Following these moves, the Chilean Senate on 
December 2 began a series of secret meetings to dis- 
cuss foreign policy. No concrete information is avail- 
able, but on December 7 the Minister of the Interior 
left for the United States. Although he is here on 
what is described as a private visit, Sefior Morales 
has been canvassing the situation with President 
Roosevelt, Vice President Wallace, Under Secretary 
of State Welles and a score of high officials. It is 
believed by some that he is preparing the way for 
the visit of President Rios to Washington which, it 
is hoped, will be made at an early date and signify 
a break with the Axis. For the time being, however, 
the Chilean government is still temporizing. 


OTHER LATIN AMERICAN VISITORS. Mean- 
while, other American Republics have expressed their 
solidarity with the United Nations’ cause through 


Page Three 





sianiumeniibiennemmnaiedl 














visits of their highest representatives to the United 
States. On November 23 President Carlos Arroyo 
del Rio of Ecuador arrived in Washington for a 
ten-day official stay during which he pledged Ecua- © 
dor’s support of the United Nations’ war and peace 
aims. Ecuador’s contribution to the war deserves 
special mention. As announced some weeks ago, it 
has agreed to the establishment of American strate- 
gic bases not only on the Galapagos islands, athwart 
the Panama Canal’s western approaches, but also at 
the westernmost point of the country, Santa Elena. 
Its economic contribution is also valuable. An im- 
portant producer of cocoa beans and balsa wood, 
Ecuador since the outbreak of war has sold most of 
its raw materials to the United States. It is now ex- » 
panding its rubber production (a million and a half 
pounds in 1941), as well as its output of Manila 
hemp, tapioca and other commodities needed by the 
United Nations. 


On December 9 Major General Fulgencio Batista, 
President of the Cuban Republic, arrived in Wash- 
ington for a seven-day State visit, during which he 
assured the leaders and people of the United States 
of Cuba’s ‘‘wholehearted cooperation in resisting ag- 
gression and in strengthening the security of the 
Western World.” He also declared that his country 
would “give complete support to a move against 
Fascist Spain.” He further assured the United Na- 
tions of Cuba’s complete economic collaboration. The 
island is a large producer of sugar and tobacco, and 
practically all of its 4.2-million-ton output of sugar 
is sold to the United States Defense Corporation. 
Cuba is also a source of extremely valuable metallic 
ores, such as manganese, copper and chromium. 


These visits, as well as those which will undoubted- 
ly follow in the near future, should greatly contribute 
to closer strategic and economic collaboration be- 
tween the United States and the Latin American 
popunlics, ERNEST S. HEDIGER 


BOOK SERVICE DISCONTINUED FOR DURATION 


Due to the war situation, we regret to announce 
that we are no longer able to order books at discount 
for FPA members. We hope to resume this service 
to members at a later date. 





The Nazi Underground in South America, by Hugo Fer- 
nandez Artucio. New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 1942. 
$3.00 


A sensational description of a very real danger to the 





*See John I. B. McCulloch, ‘‘Cabinet Changes Leave Chilean Policy , 7 . 
Obscure,’’ Foreign Policy Bulletin, November 6, 1942. security of the Western Hemisphere. 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 10, DECEMBER 25, 1942. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nationa! 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Legt, Secretary; Vera Micug tes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


, under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


ea 181 








Washington News Letter 





{ 














Dec. 21.—The circumstances that brought about 
the resignation of Price Administrator Leon Hender- 
son bear a disquieting resemblance to political events 
that contributed so much to the downfall of France. 
In that country it was the predominance of group 
and class interests over considerations of national 
welfare that crippled French armaments production 
and left the nation semi-defenseless when war came. 
Here in the United States the triumph of the 
farm bloc last week in finally obtaining the over- 
throw of the man they were avowedly “out to get’ 
has endangered the entire price stabilization program, 
lengthened appreciably the shadow of inflation, and 
created a serious menace to the nation’s war effort. 

The reason Mr. Henderson gave for his resigna- 
tion was the state of his general physical condition 
and a “rather bad impairment’ of his eyesight. Actu- 
ally, as everybody knows, it was due to the fact that 
President Roosevelt's anti-inflation program was 
doomed to fail unless Mr. Henderson went, for so 
long as that pugnacious personality remained at the 
head of the Office of Price Administration, the in- 
coming Congress would have refused to vote a single 
penny in appropriations for the OPA. Mr. Hender- 
son, in fact, had become such a dangerous political 
liability that the President, against his will, had to 
offer him as a sacrifice to Congress. 

UNPOPULARITY WITH CONGRESS. Under a 
totalitarian form of government, it is a relatively 
simple matter to impose sacrifices on a nation. A 
Dr. Schacht can deprive a nation of butter to get 
guns without having to worry about losing his job, 
so long as he retains the confidence of his Fuehrer. 
But in a democracy it is not sufficient for a high gov- 
ernment official to know his job and to possess the 
confidence of the chief executive—he must also win 
the good graces of the legislature. 

Now even most Congressmen are privately willing 
to admit that Mr. Henderson administered OPA well. 
From May 1942, when his Maximum Price Regula- 
tion went into effect, until October of this year he 
held the cost of living to a rise of only 2.6 per cent. 
Rents and clothing prices remained virtually sta- 
tionary and even food prices, over many items of 
which he had no control for a long time, went up by 
only 6.5 per cent in those six months. 

But where Mr. Henderson failed notably was to 
conciliate the body that controls the purse strings. 
When a reporter asked him recently: “What makes 
Congress so mad at you?” the Price Administrator 


FOR VICTORY °* 


frankly attributed it to his “lack of politeness.” 

more precisely, Congress was exasperated by 

Henderson’s deliberate refusal to consult its m 
bers in regard to the appointment of state OPA 
ficials. Moreover, he antagonized two important 
groups. He made enemies of labor by his insistence 
on wage stabilization and a longer work-week. And 





he angered the farmers by clamping ceilings on the 
prices of their products. 


The danger to the nation lies in the fact that the 
farm bloc, having tasted blood in getting rid of its 
arch-foe, Henderson, is now planning a new offensive 
against the price stabilization front. This pressure 
group is ready, when the new Congress convenes in 
January, to jam through a bill that would force the 
Administration to include all labor costs in the com- 
putation of farm parity prices. Such a measure, if 
enacted, would obviously send food prices skyrocket- 
ing and wreck the President's anti-inflation program. 


CALL FOR NATIONAL SELF-DISCIPLINE. 
The report that the farm bloc is preparing to put 
through such a bill lends interest to the belief that 
Mr. Roosevelt intends to nominate ex-Senator Pren- 
tiss Brown of Michigan as Mr. Henderson’s succes- 
sor. For it was Senator Brown who, in piloting the 


President’s anti-inflation bill through the Senate last | 


autumn almost single-handed, defeated the farm 


bloc’s attempt at that time to get farm labor costs | 


included in the parity formula. His fight against this 
powerful pressure group cost Senator Brown his seat 
in the November elections. 


The grave implications of the Henderson affair are 
that the American people do not realize the necessity 
of accepting sacrifices for the sake of winning the 
war, and still believe in the possibility of carrying 
on “politics as usual.’” This is certainly the opinion 
of nearly everybody who comes back to the United 
States from the war zones, including Capt. “Eddie” 
Rickenbacker who on his return to Washington De. 
cember 19 asked for “more sacrifices” from the 
American public—"‘sacrifices that seem so small and 
insignificant when you've seen what those boys [on 
Guadalcanal] haven't got.” If Prentiss Brown in- 
tends to rely on voluntary controls instead of his 
predecessor’s regulations to avert inflation, it will be 
incumbent on the American people to impose on 
themselves the self-discipline that French democracy, 
to its own destruction, so lamentably failed to display. 


JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


S 
a. 





