



Ser 


ain 
the 
ter 
ing 
ion 
ere 

in 


els, 
nor 
na- 
Bee 
red 
els. 


ted 
na-| 


ode | 
on- 
us- 


ned 
of 
nt, 
ich 
of 
ism 
ate 
ike 
nce 
vas 
ym- 
on 
hat 
> of | 
. of 





In- 


ver- 
the 


ork, 


Re- 





' 
_ 
)pin- 
| 
iphy 


tional 
iditor. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XVI, No. 3 


NOVEMBER 13, 1936 





TOWARD A NEW PAN-AMERICANISM 
by C. A. Thomson 
A discussion of the problems which will be considered 
at the Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance 
of Peace, to be held in Buenos Aires in December: peace 


organization, neutrality, trade, the Monroe Doctrine, 
armaments, communications and intellectual cooperation. 


November 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 


2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











Dr. William ¥#.- Bishop 
% University of Michigan — 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











PEACE CONFERENCE SEEKS AMERICAN SOLIDARITY 





HE announcement of President Roosevelt’s 

plan to attend the opening ceremonies of the 
Buenos Aires Inter-American Peace Conference 
on December 1, begins his second administration 
with a notable effort in the field of foreign affairs. 
The purpose of the Conference was reiterated by 
the President in an international broadcast on 
November 7, a few hours after the American dele- 
gation under Secretary Hull had sailed. It would, 
he hoped, demonstrate to “war-weary peoples of 
the world . . . that the scourge of armed conflict 
can and will be eliminated from the Western 
Hemisphere.” 

Perhaps no previous conference of American 
states has ever been convened in so cordial an 
atmosphere. Their old suspicions allayed by the 
President’s Good Neighbor policy, the American 
republics appear to consider the moment auspici- 
ous for improving international relations on these 
continents. In negotiations conducted since the 
conference was suggested by the United States 
on January 30, 1936, an agenda has been adopted 
stressing the questions of peace organization in 
the Western Hemisphere, neutrality, and trade 
among the American states. 


The conference is expected to devote much of 
its time to the task of unifying and clarifying the 
various inter-American multilateral conciliation 
and arbitration treaties. Many proposals for 
strengthening continental peace machinery have 
been advanced during the conversations of the 
last few months. Should these fail of adoption, 
however, the delegates may consider a highly 
practical suggestion made by the United States to 
outlaw undeclared wars—such as the earlier 
stages of the Chaco imbroglio and the whole of 
the Sino-Japanese conflict of 1931-1933. 

The question of neutrality will be considered 
from several angles. The conference may decide 
that American states shall restrict their insis- 
tence on neutral rights, curtail their commercial 





intercourse with warring nations in this hem- 
isphere, and adopt a common attitude with re- 
spect to conflicts involving the rest of the world— 
possibly along the lines of existing United States 
neutrality legislation. Consideration may also be 
given to the possibility of concerted American ac- 
tion to maintain stated neutral rights against any 
belligerents. 


Whatever the achievements of the conference 
with regard to peace organization and neutrality, 
an advance in these fields can scarcely fail to 
cement regional ties among American nations dis- 
turbed by the collapse of collective security 
abroad. Still greater progress in this direction 
will be effected if, under the guise of a consulta- 
tive arrangement in case of attack from overseas, 
the Monroe Doctrine is converted from a unila- 
teral statement of United States policy to a com- 
mon principle collectively upheld on the Amer- 
ican continents. This regional rapprochement 
may be complemented in the economic field by 
proposals for stimulating inter-American trade 
through a tariff truce and other measures. 


DAVID H. POPPER 


JAPAN MOVES INTO SUIYUAN 


The reported fighting in Inner Mongolia, should 
it take on serious proportions, promises to over- 
shadow the prolonged Sino-Japanese negotiations 
at Nanking, which have apparently reached an 
impasse. Dispatches from Chinese sources claim 
that a body of “Manchoukuo” troops, supported 
by Mongolian units from Chahar, invaded Sui- 
yuan province on November 5. The local Chinese 
provincial forces, it was asserted, had repelled 
the invasion after severe fighting at Taolin, 40 
miles inside Suiyuan from the Chahar border. 
Japanese airplanes are said to have assisted the 
invaders by scouting and reconnaissance work. 


Military pressure on Suiyuan province has ex- 
isted for many months. Careful preparations 








———__—X=__ 








have been made for a decisive thrust into this 
area, designed to break down the last barrier to 
Japan’s complete dominance of Inner Mongolia. 
At least half the territory of Inner Mongolia, con- 
sisting of Jehol, Chahar, Suiyuan and Ninghsia 
provinces, is already controlled by Japanese or 
Japanese-supported forces. Jehol province, oc- 
cupied in March 1933, has been incorporated into 
“Manchoukuo.” The Mongols of Chahar province, 
overawed in 1935-1936 by “Manchoukuo” forces 
under Li Shou-hsin and Wang Ying, have ap- 
parently gone over to the Japanese. The Suiyuan 
Mongols, on the other hand, seem to be backing 
the Chinese cause. Although the forces under Li 
Shou-hsin and Wang Ying have kept mainly to 
the northern sections of Chahar, the southern 
area of the province has also been subjected to 
Japan’s influence. A Japanese military mission 
has been stationed in the south at Kalgan, cap- 
ital of the province, for several years; and sim- 
ilar missions also reside at the capitals of Suiyuan 
and Ninghsia provinces. A chain of Japanese 
airdromes stretches clear across Inner Mongolia, 
from Dolonor in Chahar through Pailingmiao in 
northern Suiyuan to Tingyuan in Ninghsia. Un- 
der protest from the Suiyuan provincial govern- 
ment, the Japanese authorities recently stopped 
construction of an airdrome at Paotou, terminus 
of the Peiping-Suiyuan railway. 


In August the forces under Li Shou-hsin at- 
tempted a preliminary drive into eastern Suiyuan, 
but were thrown back by General Fu Tso-yi’s pro- 
vincial troops. Since then the commanders of these 
“Manchoukuo” irregulars have been making 
much more thoroughgoing preparations for a re- 
newed advance. According to Chinese papers, 
these leaders have been in touch with the Kwan- 
tung Army chiefs in north China, from whom 
they. have received funds and supplies. Japanese 
military airplanes have also been concentrated at 
strategic points in eastern Chahar and northern 
Suiyuan provinces. Vigorous counter-prepara- 
tions have been taken by General Fu Tso-yi, who 
has concentrated some 60,000 troops in eastern 
Suiyuan and thrown up a chain of machine-gun 
posts, concrete “pill boxes,” and trench systems. 


The outbreak of serious fighting in Suiyuan at 
this juncture would have important repercussions 
in China. Public attention has been centered on 
events in this province for many months, and an 
immediate popular demand would be raised for 
aid to Fu Tso-yi from the central government. 
Chiang Kai-shek’s recent military conferences at 
Hangchow and Loyang with north China leaders 
testify to the strength of public sentiment on this 


Page Two 








issue. Other evidences of the continued growth 
of Chinese nationalist feeling have been apparent 
in recent weeks. There has been Nanking’s stand 
against Japanese pressure, which has deadlocked 
the negotiations on Japan’s demands; the assag. 
sination on October 25 of Yang Yung-tai, governor 
of Hupeh province, known to be pro-Japanese; the 
celebrations attending the gift of some 100 air- 
planes to the government, paid for by public sub- 
scription, on the occasion of Chiang Kai-shek’s 
fiftieth birthday. Two years ago, hostilities in 
Suiyuan might have been localized, and the pro- 
vince overrun with virtually no protest from the 
rest of China; today such an outcome is no longer 


certain. T. A. BISSON | 





i 
PALESTINE QUOTA REDUCED | 


In a compromise move, the British government} 
on November 5 announced a reduced schedule of” 
Palestine labor immigration permits for the peri- 
od ending in April 1937. The new schedule of 
1,800 certificates (which covers about 4,000 per- 
sons) is almost two-thirds less than the previous 
April-to-October list of 4,500. The British Colonial 
Office justifies this reduction on the ground of re- 
duced “absorptive capacity” resulting from the 
violent disturbances of the past six months. 


Both Jews and Arabs are dissatisfied by this 
solution. The Jews are relieved at the continu- 
ance of immigration, but displeased at the reduc- 
tion in numbers, and afraid that this compromise 
may pave the way for further concessions to Arab 
demands when the Royal Commission, which will 
begin its investigation at Jerusalem on November 
11, has reported to Parliament. The Arabs, whose 
principal objective since the present difficulties 
began in April has been cessation of Jewish im- 





migration, are threatening to boycott the Com- 
mission altogether unless immigration is stopped 
during the period of its investigation as was done 
during the Hope Simpson inquiry in 1929-1930. 


The reduction of labor permits also represents an | 


indirect blow to Poland, whose impoverished Jew- 
ish population has been one of the most important 
sources of Palestine immigration in the past few 
years. The new schedule does not limit entry by 
“capitalists” possessing £1,000 or more, but it does 
curtail the less wealthy class to which most Polish 
emigrants belong. It has been reported that one 
of the subjects which Colonel Joseph Beck, Polish 
Foreign Minister, who is visiting London this 
week, planned to discuss with the British Foreign 
Office was the possibility of increasing Jewish 
emigration to Palestine. 
HELEN FISHER 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 3, NovemBer 13, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiig Busi, President; EstHer G. Oopgn, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es DEAN, BKéifor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


—— == 


— 








| 


VOL. 


| 





