had 


and 
fer. 


zeY- 
fay 
ers 
ter 

in- 
‘ian 
lur- 
irts 
uns, 


Age, 
xed 


ume 
mil- 
. in 
nly 
the 
ked 
ers 


. of 
‘ing 
y— 
»ro- 
tion 
ns. 


son, 


able 
1 its 


and 
1 of 


rden 


our 
1inst 


s in 
Nor- 
rider 


| the 


tional 
Editor. 


‘ish } 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVI, No. 33 


—a_— 


JUNE 11, 1937 





SPECIAL F.P.A. LUNCHEON 
in honor of 


HIS EXCELLENCY M. PAUL van ZEELAND 
PREMIER OF BELGIUM 
at the HOTEL ASTOR 
on Monday, June 28, at 12:45 o'clock 
(The Premier will speak in English) 
F. P. A. members, $1.75 


—— 


Non-members, $2.25 














Dr. William W. Bishop 





% University of Michigan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 














NEW PREMIER ALLAYS JAPAN'S INTERNAL CO 





NFLICT 








HE atmosphere of crisis existing in Japan 

since the fall of the Hirota cabinet last Jan- 
uary was markedly diminished on June 3, when 
Prince Fumimaro Konoe announced that he had 
succeeded in forming a new government of “na- 
tional union.” Weary of continual bickering and 
strife, all sections of the nation have warmly re- 
sponded to the new Premier’s radio appeals for 
cessation of political friction. 

The new cabinet succeeds the short-lived régime 
of General Senjuro Hayashi, which terminated 
on May 31 after 118 days in office. Hayashi’s 
sudden fall was the climax of a series of blunders, 
prominent among which were the failure to in- 
clude party members in his cabinet and the abrupt 
dissolution of the Diet on March 31 immediately 
after it had voted the budgetary appropriations 
demanded by the armed services. In the ensuing 
general election the politicians were virtually 
compelled to oppose the government, which suf- 
fered a disastrous defeat. Hayashi then reiter- 
ated his belief in “constitutional politics peculiar 
to Japan”—apparently a form of government in 
which political parties blindly follow the Pre- 
mier’s lead—and openly stated that, if he could 
not secure their assent to his program, he would 
rule in defiance of the politicians. 

Despite these authoritarian gestures, Hayashi’s 
tactics were too conservative to win the support 
of the group of young officers demanding re- 
organization of the state on a semi-Fascist basis. 
Consequently the Premier fell between two stools. 
Unsupported by the reactionaries, he needlessly 
provoked opposition among cautious liberals. His 
truculent assertions finally alienated the House 
of Peers, the Privy Council, and military and 
economic interests which realized the unsettling 
effect of long-continued internal conflict. The 
coup de grace was apparently delivered when 
the Seiyukai and the Minseito undertook con- 
certed action to bring about the fall of the cabinet. 


The new Premier is one of the few prominent 
Japanese public figures who have so carefully 
steered a middle course that they are still accep- 
table to both liberals and reactionaries as gov- 
ernment leaders. Although he lacks political ex- 
perience, he has long been regarded by the Em- 
peror’s close advisers as first-class executive tim- 
ber. I+ is generally believed that he cannot fail 
to give guarded approval to the semi-Fascist re- 
forms urged by the Army, although these will 
doubtless be effected at a sufficiently slow pace to 
avoid serious opposition on the part of politicians 
and conservative business interests. 

As one of his first moves, Prince Konoe made 
his peace with the military and induced General 
Gen Sugiyama to remain as their representative 
in the cabinet by accepting their vaguely phrased 
demands. The two relatively liberal members of 
the Hayashi cabinet—Naotake Sato, Foreign Min- 
ister, and Toyotaro Yuki, Finance Minister— 
have found no place in the new administration. 
The foreign ministry goes to former Premier 
Koki Hirota, who is expected to initiate a some- 
what stronger external policy, while Eiichi Baba, 
exponent of controlled economy and inflationary 
finance in the Hirota cabinet, assumes the impor- 
tant post of Home Minister. 

For the present Japan thus seems to have 
gained a precarious respite from open internal 
crisis. Compromise government is apparently 
to be continued under a military-bureaucratic co- 
alition headed by a Premier enjoying great pres- 
tige. The advocates of a radical swing to the 
Right have been disappointed. Yet it appears 
obvious that the outcome of the conflict which 
has raged since the beginning of the year has 
been distinctly unfavorable to the political par- 
ties. Where there were four politicians in the 
Hirota cabinet, Prince Konoe has admitted only 
two, who occupy minor posts and were chosen 
without prior consultation with their parties. The 

















standing of the parties has not been enhanced by 
their evident eagerness to come to terms with 
Hayashi’s successor on almost any terms. The 
power of initiative has completely slipped from 
the hands of the politicians. The parties still 
exist, but perhaps only because it is easier to 
secure their assent to government policies than 
to interrupt progress toward a semi-wartime 
economy by a struggle for their destruction. 


Davip H. POPPER 


NO CHANGE IN GOLD PRICE LIKELY 


Despite President Roosevelt’s statement on 
June 4 that no change in American gold policy is 
contemplated, international financial markets con- 
tinue to be disturbed over a possible reduction in 
the price which the United States Treasury is 
paying for gold. 

On the surface there appears to be ample justi- 
fication for the fear that the present price of 
gold may not be maintained. American officials 
have displayed considerable concern over the 
large influx of capital and gold into this country. 
During the last three years 3,064 million dollars 
of foreign capital have sought refuge or invest- 
ment in the United States. This migration of 
capital has in turn been almost wholly responsible 
for net imports of gold amounting to almost four 
billion dollars. During the first four months of 
the current year gold has continued to come in 
at the rate of $1,835,000,000 per annum. 

Until recently, this gold entered into our bank 
reserves and thus provided the basis for a dan- 
gerous inflation of credit. To meet this situation, 
the Federal Reserve Board has been compelled 
within the past year to double reserve require- 
ments of member banks of the Federal Reserve 
System. Moreover, since December 21, 1936 the 
United States Treasury has been keeping incom- 
ing gold out of bank reserves by buying it with 
proceeds from the sale of public debt obligations 
and holding it in an inactive account at the Treas- 
ury. By June 4 the government had already 
bought gold to the value of $825,475,985. Since 
this policy involves a costly increase in the Fed- 
eral debt at a time when the demand for economy 
is growing, officials have undoubtedly been con- 
sidering ways and means to discourage further 
imports of gold. Suggestions have been advanced 
that the Treasury should cut the price of $35 per 
ounce now being paid for gold. It has been 
argued that such a step taken by the United 
States alone would discourage the influx of cap- 
ital or, if taken simultaneously by the leading 
countries of the world, would at least reduce the 
output of gold which is now at record high levels. 

Nevertheless, the disadvantages of any reduc- 


Page Two 








tion in the price of gold are so obvious as to make 
it extremely improbable.. If the United State 
took this step, the dollar would appreciate jp 
terms of foreign currencies, thus upsetting cur. 
rency relationships just as they are attaining 
comparative stability. It would put new difficyl. 
ties in the way of our exports and tend to bring 
about a decline in prices which might affect bugj. 
ness unfavorably. Moreover, to lower the price 
of gold would involve a depreciation in the value 
of our gold holdings at the expense of the Treas. 
ury. It has been estimated that a reduction of 
$5 an ounce would alone cost the Treasury over 
$1,700,000,000. Under these conditions, it ig 
hardly conceivable that the President could obtain 
Congressional authorization to appreciate the 
value of the dollar. 

It would be possible, of course, to reduce the 
price of gold by international action without dis. 
turbing existing exchange rates. The high price 
of this metal in terms of depreciated currencies 
has been largely responsible for increasing gold 
output from a total of 22.4 million fine ounces in 
1931 to 35.3 million in 1936. If gold production 
could be lowered by reducing the price, the 
amount which would have to be absorbed into the 
monetary system would be correspondingly small- 
er. Yet international agreement would be diffi- 
cult to obtain and would certainly be opposed by 
the gold-producing countries within the British 
Empire. Moreover, it might still have unfortu- 
nate deflationary effects and would involve a re 
valuation of gold holdings entailing an actual or 
potential loss to the government of every coun- 
try subscribing to the agreement. 

The flow of capital, and consequently of gold, 
to the United States, has been caused not so much 
by the price of gold paid here, as by the lack of 
political and economic security in Europe and by 
the desire of foreigners to share in the profits of 
our economic recovery. It is largely a symptom 
of instability and fear. Fundamentally, only the 
amelioration of political and economic conditions 
abroad can bring about a reversal in the migra- 
tion of capital. To this improvement the United 
States can at present make only a limited con- 
tribution—by elaborating our trade reciprocity 
program, and cooperating in currency stabiliza- 
tion as soon as conditions prove favorable. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 





The Supreme Cause, by Estelle M. Sternberger. New 
York, Dodd, Mead & Co., 1936. $1.25 
This book contains much information bearing on the 

problem of war, but lacks a unifying thought. 





FO 


An in 


= 
Vou. 2 
—_—_— 


For 


meni 


onstf 
ducte 
centr 


least 
bata: 
anes 
barb 
tinue 
decl: 
expe 


—if 
dest 
this 
For 


Koy 
tion 
Hot 
virt 
fail 
pail 


den 
leas 


we; 


Native Policies in Africa, by Dr. L. P. Mair. London, late 


Geo. Routledge & Sons, Ltd., 1936. 12s 6d 
A valuable summary of colonial policies. 


wa 
are 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 33, Jung 11, 1937. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Screet, New York, N. Y. RAYMOND Lagsiig BuBLL, President; EstHER G. Ocpgn, Secretary; Vera MICcHELES Dan, Biéitor 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


thi 








