—<— 
en rendered 
t of one of 
se to funda. 
and that, in 
€ it possible 
the changes 
at least ac. 
Britain and 
States both 
the peoples 
here leader. 
d economic 
Or party has 
f our ideals 
and Britain 
ps through. 
ism, Russia 
‘oponent of 
oles of the 
tate orderly 
Asia. 

; impossible 
There is no 
e more sub- 
y- 
ES DEAN 


Ira Wolfert. 
15 


k, Vanguard 


who fought 
the islands. 
f Lt. iff D. 
ilipino guer- 


es retreat 
Is of Lt. St. 


vin H. Han- 


-, the world- 


employment /} 


ns for world 
| agencies— 
others—are 
ich America 
the war is 


- Root. New 


g State De- 
sensational 
lan accurate 


ited. National 
itor. Ensered a 
> allow at leat 


y 


SEP 1 4945 
“VSueral Li dyna fatered as 2nd class matter 
Ualver. 
~°Ssty of Wichizan 
. +5 
Ann Arbor. Nich 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIV, No. 45 


Auoust 24, 1945 


CHINA’S CRISIS DEEPENS AS JAPANESE SURRENDER TALKS PROCEED 


LTHOUGH Japan is a defeated nation, the 

ruling clique in Tokyo is not accepting that 
fact as final. As the process of concluding a formal 
surrender moves forward, the imperial régime is 
shrewdly seeking to preserve its power and lay the 
basis for a revival of militarism at a later date. Like 
the defeated Nazis, Japan’s overlords have but one 
regret: that they lost. Their actions since the accep- 
tance of the Potsdam ultimatum reveal unmistakably 
their desire to retain as much of the old order as 
possible and to. impede the victorious Allies. The 
similarity between the new cabinet under Prince 
Higashi-Kuni and the short-lived administration of 
Admiral Doenitz in Germany is all too clear; for the 
objective of the new cabinet is not to launch Japan 
along a new path of peaceful development, but to 
consolidate the position of the ruling groups in their 
moment of supreme crisis. 

It may be taken for granted that General Mac- 
Arthur is aware of the intentions of the Japanese 
leaders. His immediate problem, however, is to effec- 
tuate the conclusion of surrender terms as rapidly 
as possible, to land forces in Japan with a minimum 
of difficulty and incident, and to establish a smooth- 
ly operating administration in the Japanese home 
islands. The decision to use the Emperor for the 
time being to issue our orders to the Japanese people 
and armies was wise, for it means the saving of 
many thousands of American lives that would have 
been lost in an invasion of Japan. Nevertheless, with- 
in the framework of existing policy, it will be neces- 
sary to curb the present Japanese leaders and bring 
about changes in personnel as soon as we are in a 
position to do so. 

WHO DEFEATED WHOM? The trend of 
thought among Japan’s leaders is indicated un- 
mistakably in statements by the Emperor and the 
new Premier. Apparently afraid and unwilling to 


reveal to the Japanese people the full meaning of 
unconditional surrender and the responsibility of 
the government for what has happened, they seem 
to be acting almost as if the war had ended by: com- 
mon consent among the belligerents. In a rescript of 
August 15, for example, Emperor Hirohito justified 
the attack on the United States and Britain, repeated 
Japan’s wartime propaganda theme about “the eman- 
cipation of East Asia,” and suggested that Japan's 
problem from now on is to “keep pace with the pro- 
gress of the world” (presumably, first of all, in the 
field of science). 

The Emperor’s statement on the origins of the 
war is instructive, for the idea that he was opposed 
to the attack on Pearl Harbor finds no support in his 
assertion that “we declared war on America and 
Britain out of our sincere desire to insure Japan's 
self-preservation and the stabilization of East Asia, 
it being far from our thought either to infringe upon 
the sovereignty of other nations or to embark upon 
territorial aggrandizement.” In a second rescript of 
August 17, asking Japanese troops to surrender, the 
Emperor said he believed that “the loyalty and 
achievements of you officers and men will for all 
time be the quintessence of the nation.” In another 
message, issued a few hours later, Premier Higashi- 
Kuni spoke of “enhancing the lofty spirit of the 
Imperial Japanese Army.” 

EFFORTS TO DIVIDE ALLIES. It may well be 
argued that, to induce the Japanese forces on many 
far-flung fronts to lay down their arms, and to avoid 
disorder in Japan at the time of occupation, language 
of this sort is necessary. But the statements seem to 
go far beyond anything that expediency might dic- 
tate, and efforts to divide the United Nations even 
in the hour of Japan’s defeat testify to the funda- 
mental motives involved. While avoiding any specific 
reference to Japan’s attitude toward the Big Three, 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


Hh, 
i 


RTE SAP POI PIE TI A re 


Higashi-Kuni in a speech of August 17 referred to 
“the regrettable relations of the past with China” 
and said that improvement ‘will not be limited to 
just Japanese-Chinese relations, but will affect our 
proclamation which stressed the liberation of East 
Asia.” It is not fanciful to see in these remarks a 
first move toward competing with the Big Three for 
the future favor of China and reasserting the idea 
of Japan’s leadership in the Far East. 

CIVIL WAR IN CHINA? Since the effectiveness 
of political warfare is always closely related to the 
military force behind it, the Japanese maneuvers are 
more important as warnings for the future than as 
immediate threats. In China, however, there are 
political problems of immediate significance: the 
rapidly deteriorating state of affairs between Chung- 
king and Yenan is bringing China to the edge of 
civil war at the moment of victory, and the laying 
down of arms by the Japanese troops may be the 
signal for a tragic internal conflict. On the other 
hand, the domestic and external factors workin 
against long-term warfare are considerable, for it is 
doubtful whether either the Chinese people or the 
Big Three are in a mood to tolerate the vivisection 
of China following Japan’s defeat. Never in its 
recent history has China had so glorious an oppor- 
tunity to improve its position and carry forward the 
work of national construction, but the unavoidable 
prerequisite is the achievement of national unity. 

The present Kuomintang-Communist conflict has 
its roots in the past two decades of Chinese history, 
but the immediate occasion for difficulty is the surren- 
der of the Japanese armies. To the extent that either 
side in China wins the large cities still occupied by the 
Japanese and takes over the arms of the Japanese 
troops, it will be greatly strengthened in the struggle 
for power. On August 12 Chiang Kai-shek ordered the 
Communists to “remain at their posts and wait for 
further directions,” instead of carrying out plans to 
accept the surrender of Japanese troops in their 
territory. But this had no effect, and two days later 
Yenan broadcast a message to Chiang from Chu 
Teh, the Communist Commander-in-Chief, contrast- 
ing the order to the Communists to halt action with 
another order by the Generalissimo urging “officers 
and men in the various war zones to intensify your 
war efforts and actively push forward without the 
slightest relaxation.” 

On August 16 Chiang invited Mao Tse-tung, top 


Page Two 


"I 
ee 


leader of the Chinese Communists, to come ty 
Chungking for discussions. Three days later Chy 
Teh telegraphed a series of demands to the General. 
issimo, summarizing the position taken by Yenan in 
recent weeks. Chu asked that Chungking and Yenay 
reach agreement on accepting the surrender of pup. 
pet and Japanese troops, as well as on any pacts and 
treaties concluded after surrender. The Communists, 
he said, should receive the right to accept the sur. 
render of troops in areas under their control; to 
be represented at the Allied acceptance of 
Japan’s surrender; and to participate in the post-war 
control of Japan, the peace conference and future 
United Nations conferences. He demanded that the 
existing “one-party dictatorship” be abolished and a 
conference of all parties be convened to establish a 
“democratic, coalition government.” Central troops 
blockading Communist areas were to be removed, 
and democratic reforms were to be _ instituted 
throughout China. 

WHAT WILL U.S. AND US.S.R. DO? It is 
obvious that the differences inside China cannot be 
settled peacefully by the parties involved, for their 
enmities are too old, too sharp and too fundamental, 
It is also clear that neither party is in a position to 
destroy the other except through prolonged civil war, 
and perhaps not even then. Any solution must be 
based on the assumption that both Chungking and 
Yenan are part of China’s political life. If a compro- 
mise is ultimately to be reached, the assistance of 
the Big Three, and especially the United States and 
the Soviet Union, will be needed. In fact, nothing 
is more important than that these powers should 
come to a common understanding on the issues in- 
volved. 

It is clearly impossible for the powers to create 
a ready-made formula for adjusting the Chinese situ- 
ation, since the terms of any settlement of differences 
must come from inside China. What the powers can 
do is to extend their advice and assistance where it 
will do the most good and to avoid all actions tend- 
ing to promote friction in China. The recently an- 
nounced agreement between Chungking and Moscow, 
the text of which has not yet been made public, may 
enable the Russians to contribute to political im- 
provement in China. It is also deeply in the interest 
of the United States that civil war be averted, of 
promptly halted, if it breaks out. 

LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


HOW WILL BRITAIN AND FRANCE REACT TO NEW BALANCE OF POWER? 


The need for statesmanship to keep pace with 
revolutionary changes in environment, such as those 
which have so recently been ushered in by the 
atomic bomb and the still more destructive weapons 
foreshadowed by General H. H. Arnold on August 
17, has never been greater than at the present mo- 


ment. And nowhere is the necessity for comprehend: 
ing the implications of these changes more obvious 
than in Europe. For distances on the continent have 
now shrunk so noticeably that the concept of stra 
tegic boundaries or barriers behind which nations 
might withdraw for security has become a hopeless 


=———_—— 


anachro! 
new we 
dustrial 
of worl 
and Rus 
Britain 

their thi 
strength 
roles in 
ination 

Paris al 
actions 

settleme 
confere: 
traditior 


BRIT 
Britain 
both W 
and Pri 
ing the 
16 abo 
the Bal 
referrec 
exists it 
of affai 
at trag: 
| present 
Ministe 
sion in 
opinior 
upon fe 
arable 
necessit 
to a bo 
Russiat 


But | 
man fc 
ment w 
mile’ 1 
| that Bs 
its trac 
large | 
gardle: 
mean t 
rights 
| the Ru 
ain—I: 
press 
throug 
counte 
Britair 
the pa 
Europ 
portin 

Yet 
fessed 


—<— 
) come to 
later Chy 
ie General. 
y Yenan in 
and Yenan 
ler of pup. 
/ pacts and 
omMmMunists, 
pt the sur. 
ontrol; to 
Dtance of 
€ post-war 
and future 
-d that the 
shed and a 
establish a 
tral troops 
> removed, 

instituted 


DO? It is 
cannot be 
|, for their 
ndamental, 
position to 
d civil war, 
n must be 
igking and 
a compro- 
sistance of 
States and 
ct, nothing 
ers should 
= issues in- 


s to create 
hinese situ- 
differences 
powers can 
ce where it 
tions tend- 
ecently an- 
id Moscow, 
sublic, may 
slitical im- 
the interest 
averted, of 


.OSINGER 


POWER? 


»mprehend- 
»re obvious 
tinent have 
spt of stta- 
ich nations 
a hopeless 


_— Page Three 


anachronism. Moreover, the premium placed by the 
new weapons of war on scientific research and in- 
dustrial potential has done much to shift the centers 
of world power from Europe to the United States 
and Russia. As a result of these far-reaching changes, 
Britain and France, particularly, must reexamine 
their thinking on foreign policy, honestly assess their 
strength and weakness, and on that basis seek new 
roles in world affairs. Yet signs that such self-exam- 
ination has thus far been conducted in London and 
Paris are few, and current British and French re- 
actions to the new German and eastern European 
settlement sketched at Potsdam by the first peace 
conference are, for the most part, following strictly 
traditional lines of policy. 


BRITAIN FEARS DIVIDED EUROPE. Although 
Britain was a full partner to the Potsdam decisions, 
both Winston Churchill, as leader of the Opposition, 
and Prime Minister Attlee expressed uneasiness dur- 
ing the first session of the new Parliament on August 
16 about present conditions in eastern Europe and 
the Balkans. It was hardly surprising that Churchill 
referred to ‘the possible divergence of view which 
exists inevitably between the victors about the state 
of affairs in Eastern and Middle Europe,” and hinted 
at tragic events behind the “iron curtain which at 
present divides Europe in twain.” The former Prime 
Minister's on-guard attitude toward Russian expan- 
sion in Europe is well-known. Similarly, Churchill’s 
opinion that the provisional western frontier agreed 
upon for Poland—which includes one-fourth of the 
atable land of Germany—goes ‘far beyond what 
necessity Or equity requires,’ reveals his opposition 
toa boundary settlement which, in effect, places the 
Russian frontier on the Oder. 


But the fact that Prime Minister Attlee, as spokes- 
man for the Labor government, expressed his agree- 
ment with Churchill about “the abomination of police 
tule” is more significant. This statement indicates 
that Britain, despite its shift toward the left, retains 
its traditional opposition to the consolidation of a 
large part of Europe under any single power, re- 
gatdless of which power that may be. This does not 
mean that Britain is hypocritical in championing the 
tights of the small nations that have been added to 
the Russian sphere in eastern Europe, although Brit- 
ain—like other powers—has not hesitated to sup- 
pfess popular movements in various territories 
thtoughout the world when they seemed to run 
counter to Britain's security. Instead, it indicates that 
Britain continues to believe that in the future, as in 
the past, its best chance of preventing the control of 
Europe by one great power lies in a policy of sup- 
porting the democratic rights of the small nations. 

Yet an air of unreality hangs over Britain’s pro- 
fessed policy of establishing the “perfect freedom” 


for European peoples that Prime Minister Attlee de- 
fined as the goal of the Foreign Office. For the Brit- 
ish are acutely aware of the limitations on their 
power to intervene in the internal affairs of other 
states in order to establish this freedom. Instead, 
therefore, of insisting on European conditions that 
Britain would consider perfect, both the Labor and 
Conservative leaders agree that compromises must be 
accepted. Lest these compromises become the prelude 
to appeasement and steady decline, however, Britain 
is exploring possibilities of cooperating with the 
Commonwealth, the other great powers and western 
Europe, with a view to strengthening its hand. It 
seems, in fact, that the recent election indicated wide- 
spread determination on the part of the British to 
secure a government capable of appealing to large 
masses of people in the western European democra- 
cies, rather than a Tory régime that depended on 
conservative elements which commanded little sup- 
port in their respective countries. 


Whether the new Labor government succeeds in 
winning significant support for Britain in western 
Europe is largely dependent on the success of its 
present overtures to France. Harold J. Laski, chair- 
man of the British Labor party's National Executive, 
told the French Socialist party's congress on August 
12 that he hoped for a big Socialist victory in France 
in the October elections as a basis for Anglo- 
French cooperation. But even if this attempt 
meets with success, the British are well aware that 
they still will have done little to guarantee their 
future security. Thus far, no one in Britain, or for 
that matter in any of the victorious nations, has 
tackled the basic problem of maintaining peace under 
the new conditions created by recent scientific ad- 
vances. It is former Prime Minister Churchill, how- 
ever, who has the distinction of having stated the 
problem more clearly than any other leader. During 
the next few years, as he has declared, ““We must re- 
mold the relationships of all men of all nations in 
such a way that these men do not wish, or dare, to 
fall upon each other . . . and that international bodies 
by supreme authority may give peace on earth and 
justice among men.” 


FRANCE SEEKS U.S. AID. For the French, too, 
the new distribution of world power that has such 
profound implications not only for France but 
Europe as a whole, is a source of great concern. Until 
very recently, however, the immediate tasks of recon- 
struction, together with the problem of Germany, so 
completely preoccupied French leaders that they 
tended to lose sight of the long-range problems 
posed by their country’s relative decline among the 
powers. As a result, recent French foreign policy has 
sometimes seemed motivated by a desire to revive 
the plans of Foch and Clemenceau at the close of 


it 
{ 
. 
| 


—_—_—— 


World War I, just as though the strategic concepts 
of twenty-five years ago were still useful today. For 
example, French spokesmen have expressed dissatis- 
faction with the Potsdam decisions on Germany be- 
cause they left the Rhineland and Ruhr within the 
borders of a united Germany instead of complying 
with the French view that the Rhineland, at least, 
should be transformed into a buffer state against a 
possibly resurgent enemy. 


Since the news of the atomic bomb and the estab- 
lishment of American supremacy in the Far East 
as a result of Japan’s collapse has reached France, 
the French press and official circles have apparently 
been even more greatly impressed by the rapid rise 
of American power than they were last year when 
American troops landed on French soil. Grasping 
the importance of the New World in the era that 
is now beginning, General de Gaulle, who arrived in 
Washington on August 22 to talk to President Tru- 
man, appears determined to forge a close bond be- 
tween France and the United States. For it is only 
by means of such a bond that de Gaulle can solve 
two of his nation’s most pressing current problems. 
The first of these, the need for economic aid to re- 
store French industrial strength, can be met only by 
a steady flow of raw mate:iils and tools from the 
United States. On the basis of the trend toward great- 
ly increased American shipments of civilian sup- 
plies to France since V-E day—the shipments made 
during July and August having been nearly as great 
as those of the entire preceding six-month period 
—French prospects of American economic support 
are good. The second problem regarding which 
France needs American cooperation is that of the 
French colonies in the Far East, notably Indo-China. 
In view of the suspicion with which French leaders 


THE F.P.A. 


Nippon: The Crime and Punishment of Japan, by Willis 

Lamott. New York, John Day, 1944. $2.50 

A well-informed, clearly conceived analysis of the causes 
of Japanese aggression and the principles to be followed 
in dealing with Japan after defeat. Warning against the 
danger of “political scene-shifting” by present leaders in 
Tokyo, the author declares that “no government set up by 
the ruling classes of Japan in order to deal with the vic- 
tors after the war can be trusted.” 


The Economic Development of French Indo-China, by 
Charles Robequain. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1944. $4.00 
A translation of an authoritative French study of Indo- 

Chinese economic life, published in France in 1939. Devel- 


opments during 1939-45 are discussed in a supplementary 
section. 


Page Four 


—— 
en 


have long regarded Washington's attitude toward 
Indo-China, it may seem ironical that General de 
Gaulle is now turning to the United States for aid in 
dispatching French troops and administrative off. 
cials to this colony. Since, however, Chinese 
and British troops, rather than American forces, 
stand on the borders of Indo-China, and China and 
Britain are apparently prepared to occupy the coun. 
try, it appears that France is seeking the mediation 
of the United States as the least unsatisfactory solu. 
tion to its foremost imperial problem. 


PETAIN—SYMBOL OF FRENCH WEAKNESS. 
The trial of Marshal Pétain, culminating in his con- 
viction on August 15 on charges of intelligence with 
the enemy, has formed a kind of postscript to the 
four bitter years when France was linked to Hitler's 
New Order and deprived of its long-established 
leadership throughout Europe. The jury that heard 
the evidence against the leader of the Vichy régime 
and found him guilty of treason was, by its own ad- 
mission, a political jury. As such, its members were 
determined to hold up Pétain as the symbol of 
France’s weakness in 1940, when the Marshal and a 
number of other French military and political leaders 
were convinced Germany would win the war, and 
to punish him for a lack of faith in ultimate French 
victory. Since American participation in the war— 
belated though it was from the French point of 
view—has played such an important part in proving 
Pétain’s judgment wrong, it was particularly appro- 
priate that his sentence, which was subsequently 
commuted from death to life imprisonment by Gen- 
eral de Gaulle, was handed down on the day Amer. 
ican and Allied power triumphed over Japan. 


WINIFRED N. HADSEL 


BOOKSHELF 


America’s Far Eastern Policy, by T. A. Bisson. New York, 
Macmillan and Institute of Pacific Relations, 1945. $3.00 
A valuable survey of American diplomacy in Asia, pat- 

ticularly in the period since 1931. An appendix contains 

leading documents on our Far Eastern relations from Sep 
tember 1937 through the Cairo conference. 


China Among the Powers, by David Nelson Rowe. New 
York, Harcourt, Brace, 1945. $2.00 


The author examines the factors making for military 
power and reaches the conclusion that “for at least twenty- 
five years after the present war” China is very unlikely te 
“develop such technical capacity as to allow her to rely 
primarily on her own strength to guarantee her security.” 
This book is an important aid to clear thinking on Chinese 
problems. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 45, Aucust 24, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated National 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. ¥Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; VERA MIcHELES Dran, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Plea llow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Y 
1918 


| - 


<= 
o 
3 
4 
ha 


HE 

and 
August 
velopm 
feature 
agreem 
positio 
signa tc 
mutual 
entity 
both ci 
furthe: 
which 
US.S.1 
assistai 
terial 
given 
tral G 
parent 
war W 
tO Say 
sendin 
king, 
able: 
Chine: 
or rec 

RU: 


do nec 


| they h 


becau: 
than | 
of cor 
volve 
Soviet 
1920’ 
Part ¢ 
the C 
Railw 


