


rited 
{cua- 
ally, 
n its 
N its 


nent, 


ture, 
duals 
ional 
tible 


» the 


an J. 


nama 


1 the } 


r em- 


fense 


srace, 


olities | 


rming 


40-41. 
rvice, 
erna- 


ard to 
ever. 


court, 


ise on 
f the 
. free- 


Yham- 


‘e, the 
unada, 
nd the 


)xford 


' view 
ortant 
at the 
ter of 





National 
icered as 














| full success on 





JAN 1 1943 


Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XXII, No. 4 


—_—_ 


NovEeMBER 18, 1942 





AFRICAN OFFENSIVES OPEN “SIDE DOOR” TO GERMANY 


AS the war in Europe enters its fourth winter, the 
Allied offensive in North Africa appears on the 
point of breaking the deadlock Hitler had hoped to 
create. On November 7, while General Montgomery 
was forcing the remnants of Rommel’s shattered 
army tow ard the Libyan border, strong American 
forces suddenly landed at key points along the 1600- 
mile coastline of French Morocco and Algeria. Sup- 
ported by Allied naval units, American landing par- 
ties under the supreme command of General Dwight 
D. Eisenhower gained strategic footholds on the 
North African coast from Agadir on the Atlantic 
to Algiers on the Mediterranean. An extension of 
these positions eastward into Tunisia to effect a junc- 
tion with British forces driving westward through 
Libya appears to be developing. 

This Allied offensive against French territory was 
made necessary by the refusal of France’s military 
leaders in June 1940 to continue the fight against 
the Nazis from their North African bases. It was 
ultimately made possible both by the British decision 
in July 1940 to strip Britain of desperately needed 
troops to strengthen the defenses of Egypt, and by 
Hitler's even more fateful decision just a year later 
to destroy Russia’s military power before he had 
gained control of the whole of North Africa and 
the Near East. 

This great amphibious undertaking depended for 
the victory gained over Rommel 


| by brilliant coordination of superior Allied air, 





land and sea power under General Alexander and 
General Montgomery. Thus, the American offensive, 
carefully timed to coincide with that of the British, 
can be viewed as the second phase of a single Allied 
move aimed at the reconquest of a vital position lost 
to the anti-Axis forces by the collapse of France in 
1940. But it is clearly more than that. It is also part 
of a grand strategy which envisages the encircling 
of German Europe by control of its most exposed 


flank. All reports from General Eisenhower's head- 
quarters suggest that Vichy’s resistance in North Af- 
rica is not likely to be sustained and that the second 
phase of the Allied offensive may be even more 
rapidly realized than the first. President Roosevelt's 
declaration to the French people that the Allies are 
waging a war of liberation, not of conquest, will un- 
doubtedly facilitate military operations by increasing 
support for General Giraud, who took command of 
pro-Allied French forces in North Africa on Novem- 
ber 9. 


SHORTENING OF SUPPLY ROUTES. The most 
obvious advantage to be expected from the success- 
ful conclusion of this pincers attack is the open- 
ing of the Mediterranean to Allied shipping. Supply 
routes to the Middle East, Russia and India would 
be shortened by from seven to ten thousand miles. 
Even if Crete were not wrested from the Nazis, 
Allied air and naval forces operating from bases 
on the North African coast should be able to keep 
the Mediterranean open its full length. Even more 
important prospects are unfolded with respect to 
both the bombing of strategic objectives in Italy and 
the Balkans and the establishment of a land front 
on the Mediterranean coast of Europe. Landings in 
Yugoslavia, Italy and southern France should not be 
dismissed from a reckoning of the new situation. 

Whether or not any of these developments materi- 
alize in the coming months, their very potentiality 
constitutes a threat which must impose a heavy strain 
on Nazi resources of men and material. The pros- 
pect of invasion is bound to heighten tension in Italy, 
and may possibly precipitate domestic clashes which 
would necessitate an increase in German occupation 
troops. French reaction is not yet altogether clear, 
but the Nazis may feel compelled to take over the 
whole of unoccupied France. A Nazi move into Spain 
also appears possible. Repercussions from this latest 
Allied move will be felt at the other end of the Medi- 























terranean as well, where Turkey will be even more de- 


termined to resist Axis aggression. While there is no 


reason to contemplate a large-scale withdrawal of 
German troops from the Russian front, Hitler will 
have to divert considerable air strength and possibly 
some mechanized. forces either from the East or 
northern France to meet the new threats from the 
south. It would be dangerous to assume that Hitler 
has been caught napping, but his threat of Novem- 
ber 8 that he would strike a counterblow in answer 
to the American action can hardly be fulfilled in the 
Mediterranean region without weakening the Ger- 
man position on some other front. 

NEW PHASE OF WAR OPENED. Whatever 
move Hitler may make, it seems clear that the pres- 
ent Allied offensive, taken in conjunction with the 
fact that the Russian armies have now halted the 
Nazis from Murmansk to the Caucasus, marks a new 
and decisive stage in the war against the western 
Axis partners. Action in Africa can hardly be called 
the “second front,” but it may well lead to a second 


STALIN’S SPEECH CLEARS INTERNATIONAL ATMOSPHERE 


British victories in Egypt and invasion of French 
North Africa by American forces have been hailed 
in Moscow not as the equivalent of a second front— 
since they do not constitute a direct blow at Ger- 
many and therefore offer no immediate relief to the 
Russians—but as the harbinger of an Allied offensive 
against the Axis in the Mediterranean theatre of 
war. For the Russians realize that Allied command 
of the Mediterranean would, as Vice President Wal- 
lace said to the Congress of American-Soviet Friend- 
ship on November 7, open “the shortest possible 
supply route to southern Russia,” and thus link the 


Battle for the Atlantic with the Battle for the Cau- 
casus. 


GERMAN THREAT TO CAUCASUS. From the 
Russian point of view, the most important move that 
the Allies could undertake at this moment would be 
a diversion of German land forces from the eastern 
front—a diversion the operations in Africa cannot 
provide, if only because it would be physically diffi- 
cult for Hitler to transport large forces across the 





For a survey of military strategy in Africa and of 
the natural resources of the African continent, 


READ: 


Africa and the World Conflict 


by Louis E. Frechtling 


25c 


Voi. XVII, No. 13, Foreicn Poticy Reports 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5 a year; to F.P.A. members, $3. 











Page Two 








— 
——— 


front—in southern rather than western Europe. Popy. 
lar support of a strategy that would force Hitler int 
a two-front war in Europe, dreaded by Germany singe 
the time of Bismarck, should not blind us to the pos. 
sibility that the Allies, in this war, may turn to othe 
patterns than simply a frontal attack on Germany 
through western Europe. Taking advantage of the 
lessons learned at tremendous cost on the Westerg 
Front in the last war, and of the freedom of move. 
ment afforded them by their command of the seas, 
the Allies may plan a three-front or even a four-front 
war against Germany. With the Russian armies stil] 
holding the bulk of German strength in the East, 
an attack on Hitler's exposed southern flank may 
prove to be but the first of several fronts to be opened 
in western and northern Europe, as well as in the 
Mediterranean. Undue optimism at this point is un- 
warranted, but continued Russian resistance and 


further Anglo-American offensives hold the promise ; 


of a gradually unfolding pattern of victory. 
HowarpD P. WHIDDEN, JR. 


Mediterranean at the present juncture. For the time 
being, therefore, the Russians, as Stalin pointed out 
in his November 7 address to the Moscow Soviet 





on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Bolshevik 
revolution, must continue to wrestle with some 200 
German divisions—a far more formidable force than 
that put in the field against Russia by Napoleon, 
or even by Kaiser Wilhelm. 

Nor has the danger threatening Russia been avert- 
ed by the stubborn resistance of Stalingrad’s defend- 
ers. While all eyes have been focused on that key 
city, the Germans have made rapid advances in the 
area of the Caucasus. The capture of Nalchik and 








wil 


pre 


ret 


Alagir brought the Germans to the northern end of | © 
the Ossetian Military Highway, within reach of the } 
Georgian Military Highway—the one road across the | 


Caucasus that remains open a considerable part of 
the winter. The main object of the Germans in this 
theatre now is to block access by the Russians to the 
oilfields of Baku—even if the Germans themselves 
should not succeed in making use of Russia’s oil. 
Yet the Russians, undaunted by over a year of 
bitter warfare and by the innumerable political and 
economic adjustments that war has made necessary, 
have won three important advantages. In spite of 
serious losses of man power, territory and resources, 
they have preserved the cadres of their army, whose 
annihilation has been proclaimed again and again by 
Nazi propagandists since October 1941; they have 
prevented ‘the Germans from reaching Astrakhan, 
and have maintained their supply line across the 
northern Caspian; and they have forced the Nazis 


to continue the struggle into a second winter without | 


a clear-cut decision. The question now uppermost 





Popu. 
t into 
’ Since 
e Pos- 
Other 
‘Many 
E the 
ester 
move. 
Seas, 
-front 
'S still 


East, | 


May 
pened 
in the 
is un- 
> and 
‘omise 


Jr. 


> time 
-d out 
Soviet 
shevik 
ie 200 
e than 
oleon, 


avert: | 


efend- 
at key 
in the 
k and 
nd of 


of the } 


»ss the 
art of 
in. this 
to the 
selves 
vil. 

sar of 
al and 
essary, 
ite of 
yurces, 


whose | 


ain by 
+ have 
akhan, 
ss the 
Nazis 
rithout 
=rmost 

















— 
— 


is whether the Russians can turn the tables on the 
Germans and launch a counteroffensive—if not this 
winter, at least next spring, when the Allies would 
presumably have succeeded in dislodging the Axis 
powers from the periphery of Europe. 

STALIN LOOKS TO FUTURE. Observers recently 
returned from the Soviet Union believe that the Rus- 
sians have the men, the morale, and the indomitable 
will necessary for a counteroffensive but have hith- 
erto been skeptical of the eventual purposes of Brit- 
ain and the United States. This skepticism, nourished 
by memories of Munich, has been dispelled not only 
by the Anglo-American offensives in Africa but also 
by Stalin's forthright speech of November 7, which 
has noticeably cleared the international atmosphere, 
recently clouded by controversies about the second 
front and the punishment of Rudolf Hess. 

While Stalin minced no words about the necessity 





' of opening another front on the European continent, 


he confidently predicted that there will be a second 
front “‘sooner or later . . . not only because we need 
it, but, above all, because our Allies need it no less 
than we do.” Far more important for the future 
course of the war and the fate of post-war recon- 


| struction, he unreservedly associated the cause of 


the U.S.S.R. with that of Britain and the United 
States, contrasting the “program of action’ of the 
United Nations with that of the “Italo-German co- 
alition.’” In contrast to the Axis program of racial 
inequality, subjugation and exploitation, Stalin de- 
clared, the Anglo-Soviet-American program provides 
for “abolition of racial exclusiveness, equality of na- 
tions and integrity of their territories, liberation of 
enslaved nations and restoration of their sovereign 
tights, the right of every nation to arrange its affairs 
as it wishes, economic aid to nations that have suf- 
fered and assistance to them in attaining their ma- 
terial welfare, restoration of democratic liberties, 
[and] the destruction of the Hitlerite régime.” Re- 
cognizing the differences that exist in the ideologies 
and social systems of Britain, Russia and the United 
States, Stalin asserted that these differences do not 
preclude ‘‘the possibility and expediency of joint 
action’” on the part of members of this coalition 
against the common enemy. On the contrary, the 
events of the past year, notably Molotov’s visits to 
London and Washington and the conclusion of the 
20-year Anglo-Soviet alliance, indicate growing rap- 
prochement between the three countries, and consoli- 
dation of their “fighting alliance” for victory in this 
“great war of liberation.” 

It is noteworthy that, in outlining the three prin- 


Page Three 








a} 


cipal aims of the United Nations—destruction of the 
“Hitlerite state and its inspirers,” of ‘Hitler's army 
and its leaders,” and of the “hated new order in 
Europe” accompanied by punishment of “its build- 
ers’—Stalin made no threats of wholesale revenge 
against the German people. On the contrary, he 
clearly stated that “it is not our aim to destroy Ger- 
many, for it is impossible to destroy Germany, just as 
it is impossible to destroy Russia.” This realistic 
statement is perhaps the best answer yet given by 
United Nations leaders to the main point now 
stressed by Nazi propagandists—and again by Hit- 
ler in his Munich speech of November 8—that the 
Germans must continue the struggle to the bitter end 
because they know “the fate that would befall us 
should the other world be victorious.” It is essential, 
for a lasting Allied victory, that the military offensive 
now being developed in Africa should be accom 
panied by an equally vigorous and imaginative psy- 
chological offensive to drive a wedge between the 
Nazis and the German people, and prepare the Ger- 
man people for participation in the tasks and re- 
sponsibilities of post-war reconstruction. 


VeRA MICHELES DEAN 





Survey of British Commonwealth Affairs, Vol. II, Prob- 
lems of Economic Policy, 1918-1939, Part II, by W. K. 
Hancock. London, Oxford University Press, 1942. $5.00 


This volume, issued like the preceding ones under the 
auspices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, 
concludes Professor Hancock’s notable survey of Common- 
wealth affairs. In it the author completes his study of eco- 
nomic policy in the Empire with an analysis of South and 
West Africa. 


The Lost Peace, by Harold Butler. New York, Harcourt 

Brace, 1942. $2.75 

A personal narrative of the mistakes and misconceptions 
of the interwar years by a man who was on the inside of 
the Geneva experiment and is now British Minister in 
Washington in charge of British Information Services. 
The author reveals that the peace was lost largely because 
the collective method of security was never tried, and 
explains, in part at least, why. 


Our India, by Minoo Masani. New York, Oxford University 
Press, 1942. $1.75 
Fascinating account of the resources, geography, agri- 
culture and daily life of India as well as the possibilities 
of improvement. Although written for children, it will 
prove extremely instructive for adults. 


Wings of Defense, by Captain Burr W. Leyson. New York, 
Dutton, 1942. $2.50 


Although its specific facts were beginning to be out- 
moded even before publication, this book contains a good 
popular account of the United States’ system of aerial 
warfare, with much interesting material on certain types 
of planes. Some quarters will disagree with the author’s 
contention that dive bombing is no longer an effective 
weapon in land warfare. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 4, NovEMBER 13, 1942. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHELEs Dean, Editor. Entered as 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
| One month for change of address on membership publications. 


F, P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


is 


Please allow at least 








Washington News Letter 

















Nov. 9.—The current Anglo-American offensive 
in French North Africa is subjecting the traditional 
friendship between the United States and France to 
the greatest strain in its 164 years of existence. For 
the first time since the undeclared naval war of 1798, 
American and Frenchmen are fighting and killing 
one another. The Vichy government that de jure 
speaks in the name of France broke relations with 
the United States in consequence on November 8. 

The battle that the United States has opened by 
its invasion of North Africa is diplomatic as well as 
military. The hearts of the French people must be 
conquered no less than the ports and airfields of 
North Africa. Propaganda is as vital in this cam- 
paign as tanks and airplanes. 


THE PROPAGANDA FRONT. This fear is not 
as idle as it may seem to many Americans. Pierre 
Laval’s opposition to the American enterprise may 
be discounted, but Marshal Pétain’s prestige in 
France is still great, and he has rejected President 
Roosevelt's explanations with “stupor and sadness.” 
The Germans control the instruments of propaganda 
in three-fifths of France and, in the rest of the coun- 
try, the tools of publicity are in the hands of the 
Vichy Propaganda Minister, Paul Marion. For 
months this pro-Nazi agent has been hammering at 
the French people by press and radio that the Anglo- 
Americans are out to despoil France of its empire. 

President Roosevelt, with his customary flair, has 
grasped the vital importance of the psychological 
aspect of the North African campaign. While the 
Rangers were landing on the coast on November 7, 
he sent a message to Pétain and, at the same time, 
broadcast in French to the French people assuring 
them that the United States had no designs on their 
colonial possessions and that the ultimate object of 
the offensive was liberation of France from the Nazi 
yoke. Assurances were also sent by the President to 
General Francisco Franco, Spanish Chief of State, 
and to General Antonio Carmona, President of Por- 
tugal, that the American operations were not directed 
against those countries or their colonies. 

And when Laval broke relations with the United 
States President Roosevelt, after expressing ‘‘regret’’ 
for this act, added in his message of November 9, 
“we have not broken relations with the French. We 
never will.” Desire to avoid offending the suscepti- 
bilities of the French people by seeming to impose a 
government on them without their consent is prob- 
ably the reason the United States is not for the time 


FOR VICTORY ° 


being, as Mr. Hull said on the same day, extendin 
diplomatic recognition to General Charles de Gaulle’s 
Fighting French movement. 

The announcement by General Dwight L. Eisen. 
hower, Commander of the Allied Forces in North 
Africa, that General Henri Giraud has arrived in 
Algeria “to organize the French armies again to take 
up the fight” is of the utmost importance in the ef. 
fort to win the support of the French people. Gen- 
eral Giraud, who was captured by the Germans near 
Sedan in May 1940, is regarded by the French as one 
of their ablest military leaders, and his spectacular 
escape from the German prison at Koenigstein this 
spring has enhanced his already great popularity. 

END OF AN EXPERIMENT. The break with 
Vichy marks the end of a policy that the State De. 
partment has tenaciously pursued for more than two 
years despite its manifest unpopularity. Thanks to 


this course, the State Department has succeeded, as | 


Mr. Hull pointed out at his press conference on No- 
vember 8, in keeping the French fleet from falling 
into the hands of the Axis. At the same time it was 
enabled to maintain consular agents in North Africa 
and to receive first-hand information as to what was 
going on in that strategically vital territory. The 
larger purpose of winning over Marshal Pétain’s 


government to the side of the United Nations, how: | 


ever, was not achieved. 
With the entrance of the United States into the 


war on December 7, 1941, it was evident that sooner | 








or later Vichy would have to climb down from the | 
fence on which it was perched waiting to see which | 
side would be the ultimate victor. The return of | 


Laval to power last April was a clear indication that, 
when it came to a showdown, Vichy would opt for 
the Axis. Relations between the United States and 
Vichy steadily deteriorated after that disastrous de- 
velopment until they became only a “fiction,” as Mr. 
Hull aptly called them. 


— 


Rupture of diplomatic ties with the United States | 


may be the beginning of the end for the Vichy ré- 
gime. If the United Nations obtain control of the 
entire North African littoral, an invasion of Europe 
through southern France becomes a military posst 
bility. The Nazis will almost certainly be obliged to 
face this eventuality by fortifying the French Medi- 
terranean coast. German occupation of all France 
would probably be followed by liquidation of the 
Pétain government, and installation of a Nazi puppet 
récime headed by Jacques Doriot. JouHn ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


i on | 


