merce 


er for | 


‘velop. 
States, 

Presi- 
except 


signed 
up re 
or in 
mestic 
it COn- 
1e Act. 
round 
ade in 
1 Act” 


mment | 
a rea- 


luction 
avail- 
of do- 
cy are 
rerials, 
> give 
vision, 
mestic 
ith the 
eks to 
in the 


er this 
atical. 

made 
riation 


ONE 


— 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XVIII, No. 35 


—_ 


JUNE 23, 1939 


JAPAN’S ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 
by T. A. Bisson 


A detailed analysis of Japan's foreign trade 
position, which points out that severance of trade 
relations with Britain and the United States 
would deal a heavy blow to Japan’s war machine. 


June 15 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 


fee 


JUN 28-1939 


class ‘matter December 
PERICDICAL ROOA 2, 1921, at the Post 
GENER Office at New York, 
Ad. LIBRAR' N. Y., under the act 

UINTV, OF MIC 


of March 3, 1879, 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Michican 


JAPAN STRIKES AT WESTERN CONCESSIONS 


ECRETARY HULL'S first official statement on 

the Tientsin dispute, issued on June 19, served 
as a reminder to Japan that the United States would 
not accept any basic change in the status of the inter- 
national concessions in China. While disavowing any 
interest in the origins of the affair, the Secretary ot 
State declared that the American government was 
concerned ‘‘with the nature and significance of sub- 
sequent developments, in their broader aspects, 
coupled with other past and present acts and utter- 
ances in other parts of China.”” Despite its cautious 
phraseology, this statement constituted an implied 
warning that the United States would oppose efforts 
by Japan to enforce the more extensive demands un- 
officially presented by Japanese spokesmen. In 
clamping down a blockade on the British Concession 
at Tientsin, Japan’s army commanders have issued a 
virtual declaration of war on the Western powers 
and their interests in China. Five years ago, in the 
famous Amau statement of April 1934, Japan by 
implication ushered the Western nations out of 
China; today, the Japanese army is placing the sanc- 
tion of force behind the earlier declaration of inten- 
tion. After having driven foreign interests from much 
of occupied China, Japan is now applying pressure 
not only at Tientsin but also at Amoy, Shanghai 
and Hankow. 

The local issue at Tientsin, involving detention of 
four alleged Chinese terrorists by the British Con- 
cession authorities, developed more than a month 
ago. Holding that the Japanese demand for sur- 
render of these four men was not backed by sufficient 
evidence, the local British authorities have con- 
sistently refused to deliver them into Japanese hands. 
A British offer to have the evidence in the case sifted 
by a committee with a neutral chairman, presumably 
the American Consul-General at Tientsin, has thus 
far been rejected. Since establishment of the block- 


ade on June 14, Japanese military and diplomatic 
spokesmen have demanded that Britain abandon its 
“pro-Chiang Kai-shek policies” and cooperate with 
Japan’s ‘new order” in the Far East. In North China, 
Japan’s “new order” has been applied through dis- 
criminatory exchange control and a direct ban on 
the export by Western nationals of a long list of 
Chinese products. The foreign banks in the conces- 
sions have sought to protect their trade by continu- 
ing to handle the Chinese national currency, which 
is convertible into foreign exchange. Acceptance of 
Japan’s demand for “cooperation” would thus spell 
the doom of foreign trade. 

BRITAIN SINGLED OUT FOR ATTACK. 
While such demands have sharply emphasized the 
issue underlying the present controversy between 
Japan and the foreign powers, they have been ap- 
plied with some circumspection to the Tientsin sit- 
uation. In this instance, Japan has singled Britain 
out for special attack, in an obvious effort to split 
the united Anglo-American-French front formed 
last month in defense of the Settlements at Amoy 
and Shanghai. British nationals have been subjected 
to indignities, while American and French nationals 
have been considerately handled. At Tientsin, in con- 
trast to Shanghai and Amoy, the United States pos- 
sesses no jurisdictional rights; its interest is to avoid 
establishment of a precedent which might later be 
applied to the other foreign settlements. 

While the broad implications of Japan’s challenge 
have been clearly recognized in London, there has 
been no resort to precipitate action. On June 16 a 
Foreign Office communiqué indicated that the British 
offer to have the evidence against the four Chinese 
Suspects examined by a committee with a neutral 
chairman had ‘not been withdrawn,” and Britain 
still hoped that the incident might be localized. 
Should excessive Japanese demands be maintained, 


a 
——— 


however, the communiqué asserted that “an ex- 
tremely serious situation will arise,’ and the British 
government would “have to consider what immedi- 
ate and active steps they can take for the protection 
of British interests in China.” London officials and 
the Board of Trade have been conferring over pos- 
sible means of economic reprisal, and consultations 
with the Dominions have been in progress. Measures 
under consideration are said to include denunciation 
of the Anglo-Japanese commercial treaty of 1911, 
restrictions on Japan’s trade, barring Japanese ships 
from Empire ports, and action against Japan's 
currency. 


Trade restrictions, to be effective, would require 
support by the United States and France; together 
with the British Empire, these powers are supplying 
more than three-fourths of Japan’s imports of war 
materials. The British communiqué, by stressing the 
bearing of Japan’s demands on “‘all those powers 
which have treaty rights in China,” made an implied 
bid for concerted action. Support from France, un- 
doubtedly assured, is underlined by the joint dis- 
cussions of Anglo-French naval commanders now 
being held at Singapore. The United States has taken 
no direct part in the dispute, except for Secretary 
Hull’s statement that the American Consul-General 
at Tientsin might use his “good offices” as a mediator. 
Through diplomatic channels the American govern- 
ment is keeping in close touch with the British and 
French authorities, but it has apparently made no 
commitment to join in economic reprisals. 


JAPAN’S TIES WITH THE AXIS. Although 
Rome and Berlin have greeted Japan’s moves in the 
Far East with expressions of satisfaction, they have 
not as yet swung into action on their own account in 


Page Two = 


— 
— 


Europe. The dispute at Tientsin, however, is closely 
linked with the general question of Japan’s choice 
of allies in the current world crisis. Local Japanese 
army commanders at Tientsin, rather than the diplo. 
mats of the Foreign Office, have been responsible 
for the sharp attack on Great Britain. In receng 
Cabinet discussions at Tokyo regarding the advyis. 
ability of a full alliance with Germany and Italy, the 


army ministers — Itagaki in the War Office and 
Koiso in the Overseas Ministry—were obviously op. 
posed by the other ministers. The Japanese Ambassy. | 
dors in Rome and Berlin supported the alliance t | 
the point of threatening resignation if it were not 
concluded, and have conferred at Berlin since 
the Tientsin dispute assumed serious proportions 
Close working cooperation thus seems to exist among 
the local Japanese army commanders at Tientsin, the 
army ministers at Tokyo, and the Japanese Ambas. | 
sadors at the fascist capitals in Europe. It remains | 
to be seen whether this bold maneuver by Japan's 
army extremists will tip the balance in favor of closer | 
alliance with the axis. 


The outcome of the Tientsin crisis is uncertain, | 
Despite bold statements in the Japanese press, an 
undercurrent of concern over possible cooperation 
by the United States in economic reprisals is evident} 
The broad demands voiced by certain Japanese 
spokesmen have not yet been presented in official 
form. On the other hand, these demands express the! 
essential objectives of Japanese policy in China, and| 
a retreat at Tientsin can hardly be effected without! 
approval by the military. If a compromise settlement 
is reached, it will probably turn mainly on Tokyo’ 
unwillingness to risk the emergence of a firm Anglo 


i i far East. ) 
American front in the Fa T. A. Bisson 


U.S. CREDITS CHECKMATE GERMANY IN PARAGUAY 


Evidence is accumulating that the drive of the 
Roosevelt Administration to promote Western Hemi- 
sphere solidarity and combat fascist influence in 
Latin America by direct financial assistance is well 
out of the academic stage. On June 13—a few days 
after disturbing reports of German penetration in 
Paraguay—the Export-Import Bank agreed to extend 
credits up to a maximum of $500,000 to that country 
for the purpose of supporting the Paraguayan peso 
and liquidating commercial obligations to United 
States nationals. An agreement has also been reached 
for the extension of additional credits, in an amount 
not yet determined, to finance purchases of American 
materials needed for the construction of roads and 
other public works in Paraguay. The first credit will 
expire on June 30, 1941, and advances made under 
it will be repayable quarterly and carry an annual 
interest rate of 3.6 per cent. The second credit will 


' 


' 


mature over a period of seven years, and the interest| 
rate will be 5 per cent annually. 


These arrangements are particularly significant be | 
cause they involve financial assistance to a minot 
South American country in which the financial and| 
commercial interests of the United States have al 
ways been small. German trade with Paraguay has 
expanded sharply in recent years, however, and Get 
man negotiations for the construction of a new moto) 
road from Asuncién to the Brazilian border recently] 
received considerable attention in the United States| 
press. The contemplated project included the estab 
lishment of domestic industries along the highway. 
and its total cost was to have been met by a surtat) 
on gasoline and other petroleum products. While! 
the new American credits may not completely fort} 
stall German plans for economic penetration o 


— 


Parag 
many | 


NE 
while, 
ready 
long-t 
Brazil 
capaci 
to the 
as aft 
financ 
coope 
pects 
outsid 
ment 
vided 
balan 
ment 
on th 
with 
funds 

W!) 
privat 


Showc 
Fuc 
Ad 

culmil 

fidant 


South 


the §S 
from 
error 


Exile. 
Pol 
193 
An 

sojou 

descr 
muni; 
inter! 
rathe 


natio 
high 
of co 
Thus 
and 

venie 
forei 


PORE] 


Headq 


Entere 


SE. 


ore 


— 


closely 
choice 
panese 
diplo. 
onsible 
recent 
advis. 
aly, the 
ce and 
sly o 
bell 
INCE to 


-re not 


since 


yrtions, | 


among 
sin, the 
A mbas- 
‘emains 
Japan's 
f closer 


certain. 
SS, an 
eration 
-vident. 
ipanese 
official 
ress the 
na, and 
without 
tlement 
Tokyo's 
Anglo- 


SSON 


interest 


cant be- 
| ~munor 
ial and 
ave al 
uay has 
nd Get 
NV motot 
recently 
d States 
e estab 
ighway, 
a surtai 

While 
‘ly fore 
tion of 


Paraguay, they undoubtedly act as a check on Ger- 
many’'s offensive in Latin America. 


NEW CREDITS OFFERED TO BRAZIL. Mean- 


while, American business interests were reported 
ready last week to advance some $50,000,000 in 
long-term credits to assist in the development of 
Brazilian transportation facilities and industrial 
capacity. This undertaking, which will be submitted 
to the Brazilian government for consideration, came 
as a result of Brazilian negotiations with American 
financial and commercial interests. While official 
cooperation is indicated, the credits which Brazil ex- 
pects to obtain through these channels are apparently 
outside the framework of the governmental agree- 
ment negotiated in March 1939. This agreement pro- 
vided for a credit to liquidate blocked commercial 
balances, a $50,000,000 gold loan for the establish- 
ment of a Central Reserve Bank, and a commitment 
on the part of the Export-Import Bank to cooperate 
with private interests in order to make available 
funds for Brazilian economic development. 

While both the Washington Administration and 
private business interests have displayed willing- 


THE F.P.A. 


Showdown in Vienna: The Death of Austria, by Martin 
Fuchs. New York, Putnam, 1939. $3.00 
A detailed account of the intrigues and incidents which 
culminated in the collapse of Austria, related by a con- 
fidant of the last Austrian rulers. 


South American Primer, by Katherine Carr. New York, 
Reynal & Hitchcock, 1939. $1.75 
As the name suggests, this is an elementary survey of 
the South American nations and their people. It suffers 
from over-simplification and a high percentage of factual 
errors, particularly in the treatment of commercial matters. 


Eziles in the Aegean: A Personal Narrative of Greek 
Politics and Travel, by Bert Birtles. London, Gollancz, 
1938. 16s. 

An account by an Australian Left-wing journalist of a 
sojourn in Greece during the winter of 1935-1936. The 
description of the island of Anaphi, where Greek Com- 
munists are exiled, is interesting, but to the student of 
international affairs the book as a whole will provide 
rather slim pickings. 


Visit, Search and Seizure on the High Seas, by J. I. 
Frascona. Privately printed, 1938: by the author, 40 
West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. $2.00 
This volume contains a proposed convention of inter- 

national law on the regulation of belligerent rights on the 

high seas. While endeavoring to retain as much as possible 
of commonly accepted law, it also suggests modifications. 

Thus the author proposes to revive the old usage of neutral 

and belligerent passports, in order to reduce the incon- 

venience of search. Should a general war break out, all 
foreign offices would profit by a study of this volume. 


Page Three 


ness to extend effective aid to Brazil, holders of the 
Brazilian dollar bonds outstanding in this country 
have received no word regarding the action they 
might expect on debt service. Under the March 
agreement, Brazil had undertaken to resume service 
payments, in default since late 1937, as from July 1, 
1939. With this deadline only a few days off, how- 
ever, no official action has been taken, although 
June 14 press cables from Rio de Janeiro indicated 
that a “token” payment might be made pending the 
negotiation of a definitive settlement. In the mean- 
time, quotations for Brazilian government bonds in 
New York have declined about 30 per cent from the 
levels reached last March on news that Brazil had 
agreed to resume service. 


HowarpD J. TRUEBLOOD 


LISTEN IN on the FPA’s radio program—Foreign 
Policy Forum—broadcast over WNYC every Thursday, 
8:30 to 8:45 p.m. An informal, unrehearsed discussion 
of international affairs by members of the FPA Research 
Staff. We shall be glad to have your comments and 
criticism. 


BOOKSHELF 


Studies in Income and Wealth. New York, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, Vol. I (1937), $2.50; 
Vol. II (1988), $3.00 


A number of recognized authorities make important con- 
tributions in clarifying the concept and measurement of 
national income and wealth. 


Anthony Eden, by Alan Campbell Johnson. New York, 
Ives Washburn, 1939. $3.00 


A comprehensive biography, well illustrated, that covers 
every detail of Mr. Eden’s career but reveals little regard- 
ing his personality and political objectives. 


The Decline and Fall of the British Empire, by Robert 
Briffault. New York, Simon and Schuster, 1938. $2.00 


A strident condemnation of everything English by the 
author of Europa, who predicts with pleasure—and with 
many brilliant epigrams and exaggerations—the collapse 
of the Empire. 


Capitalism in Crisis, by James Harvey Rogers. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1938. $2.50 
A brief discussion of the American economic dilemma, 
containing recommendations for compromise and long- 
term planning, and many astute and satirical comments 
on modes of thought in goverment, business and labor 
circles. 


The Tragedy of the Chinese Revolution, by Harold R. 

Isaacs. London, Secker & Warburg, 1938. 18s. 

An analysis of fifteen years of the Chinese revolution, 
with a foreword by Leon Trotsky. Argues that the Chinese 
Communists have strayed from a “pure” revolutionary 
path by cooperating with the Kuomintang, thus repeating 
the “mistake” of the 1925-27 united front. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 35, JuNnE 23, 1939. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


RAYMOND LgsLig BuBLL, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera Michgrtes Dgan, Eéiter. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


ED» 181 F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JUNE 19.—The Administration won the first round 
in its fight to secure revision of the Neutrality Act 
on June 13, when the House Foreign Affairs Com- 
mittee recommended favorable action on the so-called 
Bloom Resolution, which is closely modeled on the 
program recommended by Secretary Hull three weeks 
ago. 


Before reporting the measure, the Committee had 
voted down a series of amendments sponsored by 
the opposition minority and designed to stiffen the 
mandatory provisions. In rapid succession the Com- 
mittee rejected proposals to restore the automatic 
embargo on arms exports, to give Congress an equal 
voice in invoking the Act and to limit the President's 
discretion in determining the existence of a state of 
wat. 


As finally reported, the Bloom Resolution not only 
eliminates the arms embargo, but authorizes a broad 
extension of the discretionary powers of the Execu- 
tive. It permits wartime sales to any belligerent able 
to pay cash and willing to assume title to war ma- 
terials at American ports. The President, moreover, 
is not compelled to invoke the Act unless he finds 
“that it is mecessary to promote the security, or pre- 
serve the peace of the United States, or to protect 
the lives of citizens of the United States.” In such a 
case, he is authorized to forbid American citizens or 
vessels flying the American flag to proceed through 
“areas of combat operations,” as defined by the Presi- 
dent, under such limitations and exceptions as he 
may prescribe. The Bloom Resolution eliminates the 
existing provision forbidding American vessels from 
carrying arms to belligerent states but continues the 
present ban on loans and credits, as well as the re- 
strictions on travel by American citizens and the use 
of American ports by belligerent nations. 


FAVORABLE HOUSE ACTION FORESEEN. 
The next test of strength will come when the Bloom 
Resolution is brought up in the House for debate, 
probably within ten days. The favorable Commit- 
tee vote of 12 to 8, which followed straight party 
lines, is generally accepted as evidence that the 
measure will pass the House with a substantial ma- 
jority. While passage of the Bloom Resolution is 
taken for granted even by the Republican leaders, 
the opposition, led by Representative Fish, is pre- 


paring to make as strong a fight against it as the 
rules of the House permit. 

In the Senate the Administration faces a deter. 
mined minority which is preparing to hold Congress 
in session for many weeks before accepting the pro. | 
posed amendments. While the opposition has not | 
revealed its full strength, it has secured the signa. 
tures of 21 Senators to a round-robin expressing op. | 
position to the Administration proposal for repeal | 
of the arms embargo. In addition to those signing the 
round-robin, the opposition has gained several new 
recruits, including Senator McNary, Republican 
Floor Leader, and Senator Walsh of Massachusetts, 
chairman of the Naval Affairs Committee. The op- 
position strategy is to delay a final vote in the Senate, 
if possible until late in August, in the hope that the 
Administration will permit the issue to pass over 
until the next session convenes in January. In an 
effort to discourage these tactics, the Administration 
has passed the word to Capitol Hill that President 
Roosevelt will insist on revision of the Neutrality 
Act before adjournment of the present Congress. | 


WAR INSURANCE NEW SENATE HURDLE. 
The Administration, however, faced another possible 
hurdle last week when Senate opposition developed 
against a bill to create a war risk marine insurance 
agency backed by the Maritime Commission. Under 
this bill, the Maritime Commission would provide 
marine insurance to cover war risks on American and 
foreign vessels “engaged in the foreign or domestic 
trade of the United States.’” The measure would also 
cover the cargoes and crews of American ships, in- 
cluding those owned or controlled by the government. 

Opponents of the Administration’s neutrality pol- 
icy interpret the insurance bill as a plan to facilitate | 
wartime trade and commerce with Britain and France. | 
Senator McCarran, one of the opposition bloc in the 
Senate, linked the insurance measure with the pro 
gram for neutrality revision in a strongly worded | 
statement denouncing American intervention in Ew | 
rope. ‘I shall resist,” he said, “and I think I belong | 
to a group that will resist to the last of its ability any | 
legislation which even tends to bring this country | 
into controversies foreign to our American policy of | 
freedom from foreign entanglements.” 


If the Administration is really prepared to hold 
Congress in session through August, however, it 
would appear to have sufficient votes to carry its 
neutrality program. 


W.T. STONE 


FO 


An in 


Unite 
to Ja 
series 


