





°r- 
cial 


ated 
942, 
0 
ions 
alth 
for 


bers 
hree 

af- 
inge 
edu- 
yard 


iter- 


‘ited 
the 
iefly 

the 


ton, 


hile 


nns. 








ional | 


least 





PURINA 
GBENMYAL LISRAR 
AY. oF Mich 


<dGe 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 












An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
















Vou. XXIV, No. 52 


OcToBER 12, 1945 








NEW APPROACH NEEDED TO REBUILD BIG THREE UNITY 


LONDON, Oct. 6.—The wisest advice to heed dur- 
ing this period of crisis and controversy is that given 
by Dr. Evatt, Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
who is emerging as one of the leading statesmen of 
our times. At his press conference on October 5, he 
declared that the outcome of the meeting of the For- 
eign Ministers “is by no means an irreparable set- 
back. Or. the contrary, it gives a chance, while there 
is still time, for a new approach to the task of mak- 
ing the peace settlement in a just and democratic 
manner.” Certainly, it would be nothing short of 
criminal to speak, as some commentators do, of a 
catastrophe, or assume the inevitability of a head-on 
collision between the Western powers and Russia. 

What was most obviously at fault during the first 
session of the Council of Foreign Ministers was the 
procedure decided upon at Potsdam for the drafting 
of peace treaties. The Potsdam Declaration stated 
in connection with the drafting of European peace 
treaties that, ‘for the discharge-of each of these 
tasks the Council will be composed of the mem- 
bers representing those states which were signa- 
tory to the terms of surrender imposed upon the 
enemy state concerned. For the purpose of the peace 
settlement for Italy, France shall be regarded as a 
signatory to the terms of surrender for Italy. Other 
members will be invited to participate when matters 
directly concerning them are under discussion.” A 
further clause provided that “whenever the Council 
is considering a question of direct interest to a state 
not represented thereon, such state should be invited 
to send representatives to participate in the discus- 
sion and study of that question.” 

Dr. Evatt, who vigorously fought Russia’s interpre- 
tation of the veto power at San Francisco and can by 
no stretch of the imagination be described as pro- 
Soviet, has justly pointed out that the addition of 
France and China to the Big Three as members of the 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 
































Council of Foreign Ministers followed a wrong 
analogy. For if it was the intention of the Big Three 
to model the Council of Foreign Ministers on the 
Security Council of the United Nations, they should 
have included not only the five permanent members 
but also the six non-permanent members, all of which 
are to be middle or small nations. Moreover, he em- 
phasized a fact which had become lamentably ap- 
parent during the London Conference, that the pro- 
visions for associating other countries with the pro- 
ceedings of the Council were vague and imprecise. 
From the point of view of Russia, the participation 
of France, which in Moscow's opinion made no im- 
portant contribution to the defeat of Germany, and 
of China, which is obviously not a European power, 
was unnecessary and undesirable. 


WIDER DISCUSSION NEEDED. It had been 
clear since Dumbarton Oaks that Russia expected the 
Big Three, which are charged with responsibility for 
keeping the peace, to use the machinery of the United 
Nations for the purpose of fulfilling their responsi- 
bility. This concept of international organization is 
based on the assumption that the three great powers 
will take the leadership in making the peace, a 
leadership which Dr. Evatt declared is undisputed. 
It is not a democratic concept, if by democracy we 
understand the equality of all nations, but it had 
already been accepted by the United States and Brit- 
ain when they agreed to the use of the veto power. 


Yet, as Secretary of State Byrnes broadcast on 
October 5, no one nation can expect to write the 
peace in its own way. The problem now, as at San 
Francisco, is how to temper the great powers’ leader- 
ship in world affairs by scrutiny and discussion of 
their decisions at a larger gathering of the United 
Nations. This has been suggested by Dr. Evatt, who 
said that as a starting point the Big Three should 





tem, eS 


ee GbE he 


ee ee nee 


—— 








discuss many questions of major principle and policy 
when they next consider the peace terms. He went on 
to propose the participation of other states which 
carried on “sustained belligerence’ against the Axis 
powers and contributed militarily to the defeat of the 
enemy on whom terms are to be imposed. 
Assuming, however, that the Big Three can con- 
cur in some such formula as that proposed by 
Dr. Evatt, many Americans and Britishers here are 
asking whether it is possible to negotiate with the 
Russians at all, or whether all hope of an agreed 
peace settlement with them must be abandoned. The 
tactics of Mr. Molotov, who on September 11 acqui- 
esced in the participation of France and China, only 
to repudiate his agreement on September 22, are diffi- 
cult to justify by any standards acceptable to West- 
ern public opinion. British and American negotiators, 
moreover, have long felt that Mr. Molatov is the 
most rigid of the Russian leaders, who treats interna- 
tional documents as old Bolsheviks used to treat the 
party line, allowing no deviation and regarding any 
Opposition to his terms as inspired by sinister motives. 
Nor can France and China be accused of having tried 
to embarrass the Big Three, for their representatives 
were most courteous and self-effacing during the 
negotiations, and French Foreign Minister Bidault 
intervened only, as provided by the Potsdam Declara- 
tion, in the discussion of the peace treaty with Italy. 
MOSCOW FEARS WESTERN BLOC. But cer- 
tain intangibles cannot be left out of consideration in 
weighing the results of the London Conference. The 
Russians, rightly or wrongly, detected a tendency on 
the part of Britain and the United States to stand to- 


TRUMAN TAKES FIRST STEPS TOWARD CONTROL OF ATOMIC POWER 


President Truman’s plan for the control and de- 
velopment of atomic energy, given in its bare essen- 
tials in his address to Congress on October 3, has 
opened what must surely prove to be the most cru- 
cial debate in this country or any other nation. After 
a delay of over two months since the first announce- 
ment on August 6 that an atomic bomb had been 
dropped on Hiroshima, Congress has now received 
proposals for dealing with this revolutionary devel- 
opment, although the President’s suggestions on in- 
ternational control of the use and development of 
atomic power are to be announced more fully in a 
subsequent message. In a press interview on Octo- 
ber 8 Mr. Truman stated that the secret industrial 
processes involved in releasing atomic energy 
would not be disclosed to other nations. But he 
reiterated that he intends to initiate talks, first 
with Canada and Britain, concerning the terms 
under which international collaboration and ex- 
change of scientific information might safely pro- 
ceed. Beyond this the President has offered hope that 
some kind of international arrangements may be 


Page Two — 


continues to be the prey of hunger, chaos and despair, 








—— 


gether and of France to side with the Western poy. 
ers, and have hinted at their fear of a Western blog 
There is no evidence that Washington and Londo, 
had any preliminary understanding. On the contrary, 
one of the criticisms of the conference is that the 
United States and Britain were only sketchily pre. 
pared for considering the questions on the agenda 
But Russia’s suspicions have had the result of bring. 
ing them closer together, as well as effecting a rap 
prochement between them and France which may, ip 
turn, soften its attitude toward the Germans. 

Russia still feels isolated at international confer. 
ences and fearful that its allies will resume the atti. 
tude of hostility current before 1941, since its mil- 
itary aid is no longer needed. That there is consider. 
able justification for Russia’s apprehension on this 
score has been amply demonstrated since V-E Day, 
But whatever grounds each of the great powers may 
have for suspecting the others, the grim fact is that, 
unless the Big Three can agree on the peace treaties, 
there can be no stabilization in Europe, no with 
drawal of Russian troops from satellite countries, and 
no long-range decisions about the political, economic 
or social rehabilitation of the continent. 

Reports from the continent are unanimous in pre. 
dicting the worst winter there since 1939. If Europe 


the victors will not need to worry much longer about 
husbanding the fruits of victory. No matter what else 
may divide the Big Three, a common fear of the te. 
sults of disagreement should hold them together at 
future meetings. 

VeRA MICHELES DEAN 


made to renounce the use and development of atomic 
energy for war purposes. 

AN ALTERED WORLD. At the same time, 
Chief of Staff General George C. Marshall has laid | 
before the public his review of America’s part in the | 
war and his estimate of our future security needs. In| 
sketching the pattern of war in the 20th century, | 
General Marshall's report to the Secretary of War, | 
issued on October 9, pays special attention to the | 
harnessing of atomic power. In these colorful but | 
sober words the Chief of Staff points up the present 
discussions: “As is obvious from the atomic bomb, | 
the developments of the war have been so incredible 
that wildest imagination will not project us far from 
the target in estimating the future. . . . This discov: | 
ery of American scientists can be man’s greatest bene: | 
fit. And it can destroy him. It is against the latter | 
terrible possibility that this nation must prepare oF | 
perish.” 

Slowly the story of the dramatic production of the 
atomic bomb is being told. Yet much more factual 
information about the nature and potentialities of 











———— 


this ni 
which 
dictio: 
atom 
dence 
view | 
in the 
foresl 
for tl 
be pre 
sover' 
—an 
using 
will « 
ships 
will < 
boun 
altere 
level: 
mate 
dista 
ment 
reasc 
of Fe 
disaf 
whic 
pow 
for | 
Euro 
selve 
P] 
the | 
alter 
the ; 
try s 
assu 





Jon 
a ty, 
the 
Dre. 


da, 


itti- 
nil. 
Jer- 
this 
ay. 
nay 
iat, 
1€S, 
ith 
and 
mic 


re 
ope 
alr, 
Out 
else 


r at 


mic 


me, 
aid 
the 
In 
ify, 
/ar, 
the 
but | 
ent 
mb, 


ible 


“OV- 





~ne- 
tter 
> of | 


the 
ual 
of 








—— 
— 





this new power resource is needed. The dispute as to 
which Congressional committee should have juris- 
diction over any bills introduced for the control of 
atomic power only emphasizes this need. But all evi- 
dence available thus far substantiates the President’s 
view that “a new force too revolutionary to consider 
in the framework of old ideas” is at hand. If this 
foreshadows the adoption of internal state controls 
for the development of atomic energy, it surely can 
be predicted that the relationships among the world’s 
sovereign states, both large and small, will be altered 
—and altered drastically. With the possibility of 
using atomic power the methods of warfare itself 
will change, and security needs and power relation- 
ships reflecting the world situation before August 6 
will appear outmoded. Older concepts, like strategic 
boundaries and bases, land mass and position, will be 
altered. As barometers of power, even population 
levels and availability of the traditional basic raw 
materials may become unimportant. In the not too 
distant future radically new estimates of the require- 
ments of national security will be necessary. For this 
reason the recent stalemate reached by the Council 
of Foreign Ministers in London appears all the more 
disappointing. For the differences among the Allies 
which emerged at London arise out of patterns of 
power politics existing prior to August 6. Jockeying 
for position either in the Mediterranean or Eastern 
Europe becomes unimportant if strategic areas them- 
selves pale into insignificance. 

PRESENT NEEDS. It is imperative, then, that 
the United States and other nations take stock of the 
altered situation now confronting them. Although 
the argument will continue as to whether this coun- 
try should disclose the “‘secret’’ of the atomic bomb, 
assurance has been given that the principles of atomic 


Page Three 





——_ 





fission are, or can be, known by all scientists re- 
gardless of nationality. It remains, therefore, mete- 
ly a question of time until production processes like 
those presently employed, or other new ones, are de- 
veloped outside the United States. The central ques- 
tion is that of control. That the United States must 
now make a decision on this score in haste only high- 
lights the crucial nature of the issue. The ramifica- 
tions of the use of atomic energy both for war or 
peace are so limitless, however, that nothing less 
than the creation of a commission with full powers 
of control, such as President Truman has suggested, 
will be adequate to frame policy and carry it into 
operation. In framing this policy the commission 
should be authorized to consider military defense un- 
der the new conditions, the nature of such interna- 
tional controls as are to be devised, the adequacy of 
attempts to restrict the use of atomic energy as a 
weapon of war, as well as the implications of the 
further development of atomic power for peacetime 
economic pursuits. 

While the United States must first clarify its policy 
on atomic energy, international decisions will doubt- 
less also be necessary with regard to its world con- 
trol. Perhaps greater authority must now be granted 
to the United Nations Security Council and its Mil- 
itary Staff Commission. For this reason it may be 
hoped that the UNO Preparatory Commission now 
concluding its work in London can arrange for the 
first meeting of the new organization before the end 
of the year, as proposed by the United States dele- 
gate, Edward R. Stettinius, Jr. Consideration of the 
problems posed by the use of atomic energy should 
then be included in the agenda of the first meeting 
of the United Nations Organization. 

GRANT S. McCLELLAN 





Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March 8, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 


Published weekly atc New York 16, N. Y. for October 1, 1945. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 


Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally appeared Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly sworn ac- 
cording to fw, deposes and says that she is the Editor of the FOREIGN 
POLICY BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
and belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
said publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in Section 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 


1. That the names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 
for, and business managers are: 
-Publishers—Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, 
New York 16, N. Y. 
Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 
Managing Editor—None. 
Business Managers—None. 
2. That the owner is: 
Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, the principal officers of which 


are: Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorothy F. Leet, Secretary; both of 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y.;*and William A. Eldridge, 
Treasurer, 70 Broadway, New York 4, N. Y. : 
3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security. 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
or a securities, are: 
None. 


4. That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock- 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the company, 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; also 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing t's full 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the 
company as trustees hold stock and securities fn a capacity other than that of 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other 
person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in the 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 7th day of September, 1945. 
{Seal} CAROLYN E. MARTIN, Notary Public. 


New York County, New York, County Clerk’s No. 365, New York County 
Reg. No. 164-M-7. (My commission expires March 30, 1947.) 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 52, Ocroper 12, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lugr, Secretary; VERA MicHeLes Dan, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


EP 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 












ane 


ae 
Ns, 


: Pr: Beak 4 


ie Oe bate eh Sia 


we PA FR wR REEL e 


Qeapre tiie <4 


ER sine Sn Rama oto ni a 


Washington News Letter ny. ne 





! 











U.S. BACKS CHUNGKING AGAINST COMMUNISTS IN NORTH CHINA : 


The arrival of U.S. Marine Corps contingents at 
Tientsin and near-by points in North China could 
lead to armed involvement by this country in the 
long-standing conflict between the forces of the 
Chinese Central Government and the Communist 8th 
Route and New 4th armies. The Administration was 
aware of this possibility when it ordered the Marines 
into China, where they will back up the United States 
policy of firmly supporting the central régime headed 
by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek. 

CHUNGKING AND YENAN VIE FOR SUR- 
RENDER. Tientsin lies in an area where both the 
Central Government and the 8th Route Army claim 
the right to accept the surrender of Japanese troops, 
and the Marine commanders have instructions to en- 
force the order of General Douglas MacArthur desig- 
nating the Central Government forces as the sole au- 
thority. The mere arrival of the Marines might deter 
the 8th Route Army commanders from pursuing their 
unauthorized demands, and the Communist spokes- 
men contemplate their presence with alarm. 

“The presence of American troops in Tientsin will 
actually and inevitably lead to interference in Chinese 
domestic affairs and inevitably help the Kuomintang 
to oppose the Chinese Communist Party and 100,- 
000,000 people in the liberated areas,” the Commu- 
nist-operated New China News Agency announced 
on September 30. Government spokesmen, on the 
other hand, expressed pleasure at the dispatch of the 
Marines, who are expected to withdraw when the 
Central Government has regained authority in the 
area where they are stationed. ‘The US. landing is a 

concrete expression of mutual aid and cooperation 


~~ between the allies in military matters,” said the 


Chungking Army newspaper Sao Tang Pao on Octo- 
ri. 

Controversy between the Central Government and 
the Communists over acceptance of the surrender 
gives acute expression to the chronic differences be- 
tween the two groups. The particular issue has been 
mounting in intensity since August 17, when Com- 
munist General Chu Teh sent a memorandum to the 
American, British and Soviet Ambassadors in Chung- 
king demanding that the Communists participate in 
the surrender. None of the Ambassadors responded 
favorably to the demand. | 

The rivalry over the surrender in northern China— 
where Communist ttu9ps were more active than Gov- 
ernment forces during the war—has been partly re- 
sponsible for occasional armed clashes between 
troops of the two factions. The New China News 





Agency has accused Chiang Kai-shek of using puppet 
and Japanese forces to combat the 8th Route 
and information reaching Washington through othe 
channels indicates that both the Central Government 
and the Communists are trying to attract the puppets 
to their sides. “On September 20 the Kuomintang 
troops led the puppet Independent Front Army from 
Wuhu, Nanling and Fanchang to attack the Hsinkoy 
area in liberated Anhwei,” said the New China Newsy 
Agency on October 2. “The New 4th Army wag 
forced to defend itself.” On September 30 the same 
agency broadcast: “Chinese authorities are using Jap 
anese troops to ‘recover lost territories.’ ”’ 
CONTINUING SEARCH FOR UNITY. Against 
this background of fierce factionalism, Government 
and Communist representatives have been negotiat 
ing in Chungking since August 28 for an understand: 
ing that could lead to Chinese unification. United 
States officials are hopeful that Chiang Kai-shek and 
Mao Tse-tung, the Communist leader, are making 
real progress toward agreement, but the same 
has been burning with irregular brightness for almost 
two years. In order to support its position in the 
negotiations, each faction is displaying its militany 
strength. The Central Government, besides skirmish: 
ing with the Communists in isolated areas, on O¢ 
tober 3 forced Lung Yun, a once powerful war lord, 
from his governorship of Yunnan. In spite of the 
military displays and clashes, however, China is not 
yet torn by civil war. 
If the Chiang-Mao talks have concrete results, # 
could be said that the 10 months’ tour of Patrick 
Hurley as United States Ambassador to China has 
been something of a success. But if they fail, the 
United States may be forced to reconsider the Hurley 
policy of energetic support of Chungking. Without 
agreement between Chiang and Mao, the Cental 
Government will be helpless to exert its authority 
over a large segment of China. Hurley has returnéd 
to the United States amid doubt as to whether he 
will resume his post. 
In another effort to bring about unity, the Kut 
mintang and the Communist party on October 2 come 
curred in the suggestion that non-party men af 
representatives of the Chinese Democratic League (4 
federation of third-party liberal groups) meet to dit 
cuss the calling of a political conference on peacefill 
reconstruction of the country. The Chinese Deme 
cratic League, although a small, weak organizatiom 
might serve as an agent in bringing together the Kue@ 
mintang and the Communists. BLaiR BOLLES | 








