ee 


JSSIA? 


1 Europe 
sians are 
ete with 


TRADE 
ade will 
iS it was 
ion. The 
ved that 
1S might 
ings and 
>d—with 
-to send 
ing Jul 
mic con 
~ Ropes 
V ashing. 
the Rus 
rade and 
had dis. 
>conomic 
Russians 
was still 
truction, 
the next 
0 permit 
on. Nev: 
Sion ap 
re active 
her steps 
> pace of 
sther the 
1promise 
tern Eu 


ADSEL 


URIES 


| US. 


15th 


wuly. oF nice 


‘Bk iwi AL ce 


SRMBRAL LIBRA’ 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXV, No. 52 


OcToBER 11, 1946 


Y.S.-U.S.$.R. CONCESSIONS NEEDED TO END ATOM BOMB DEADLOCK 


HE bitter Wallace-Baruch controversy concern- 
ing the merits and defects of the American 
proposal of June 14 to the United Nations Atomic 
Energy Commission* threatens to befuddle public 
opinion on the crucial question of what the United 
States and Russia are willing to do about control of 
atomic energy. Leaving aside the personal attacks 
made on both sides, it is clear that Wallace and 
Baruch differ both as to procedure and substance. 
WALLACE OBJECTS. In his letter of July 23 to 
President Truman on this country’s relations with 
Russia, supplemented by the statement he issued 
on October 3 in reply to that of Baruch on Octo- 
ber 1, Mr. Wallace raised three main objections to 
the American atomic energy proposal of June 14. 
First, he asserted that it envisaged “step-by-step” 
negotiations which, he believes, will prove ineffec- 
tive, and insisted that “the entire agreement will 
have to be worked out and wrapped up in a single 
package.”” Second, he said that under the proposal 
the United States would retain its stockpile of atomic 
bombs and would continue to manufacture more 
bombs, and at the same time demand from other 
nations, notably Russia, both information about 
their resources of uranium and thorium, the two 
fissionable materials, and discontinuance of research 
into the military uses of atomic energy. Third, Mr. 
Wallace criticized as irrelevant the United States 
proposal to abandon the veto power over the de- 
cisions of the Atomic Energy Commission. 
BARUCH REPLIES. Mr. Baruch, in his memo- 
randum of September 24 to President Truman and 
in his statement of October 1 attacking Mr. Wal- 
lace’s refusal to disavow remarks in his July 23 letter 
which Baruch regarded as untrue, replied to Wal- 
lace point by point. In answer to Wallace's first 


*Foreign Policy Bulletin, June 21, 1946. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


objection he said that, while according to the Amer- 
ican proposal the plan of control would have ‘to 
come into effect in successive stages,” the proposal 
actually provides for the “single-package” pro- 
cedure; for it states that these stages “should be 
specifically fixed in the charter or means should be 
otherwise set forth in the charter for transition 
from one stage to the other.” In answer to Wallace's 
second objection, Mr. Baruch pointed out that the 
United States, pending the conclusion of an atomic 
energy control treaty by which all nations would 
be equally bound, had not asked others “‘to refrain 
from research on the military use of atomic energy 
and would not ask this unless we were prepared to 
cease such research ourselves. We have not asked 
others to disclose their own material resources and 
would not do so unless we were prepared to dis- 
close our own.” (It was with reference to this issue 
particularly that Baruch asked for a retraction by 
Wallace). In answer to Wallace’s third objection, 
concerning use of the veto power, Mr. Baruch vig- 
orously disputed the contention that this issue is 

“irrelevant.” On the contrary, he reiterated the view 
he had expressed in presenting the American pro- 
posal of June 14 that punishment of violations of 
international control lies at the very heart of the se- 
curity system, and that “there must be no veto to 
protect those who violate their solemn agreement 
not to develop or use atomic energy for destructive 
purposes. ” 

MUTUAL TRUST MAIN ISSUE. The main 
issue between Baruch and Wallace is their disagree- 
ment on the most promising way of creating mutual 
trust between the United States and Russia. Mr. 
Wallace believes that the counter-proposal presented 
by the Russians to the Atomic Energy Commission 
on June 19 is in itself “an indication that they may 


—~~>l"l_—>==a_>=_annNnBNDBDBmm]="!_ Prange Two 


be willing to negotiate seriously if we are.” This 
counter-proposal contemplates national control over 
the use of atomic energy as contrasted with the in- 
ternational control suggested by the United States 
with the support of many other nations. It has been 
criticized on this ground by experts who are other- 
wise friendly to Russia, but who do not in all hon- 
esty believe that national control will prove effec- 
tive in this instance any more than it did in the 
Kellogg-Briand pact under which the signatory na- 
tions agreed to abolish war as an instrument of for- 
eign policy, and then took no international action to 
implement their pledges. 

There is considerable evidence to support Mr. 
Wallace's view that possession by the United States 
(as well as Britain and Canada) of the secret of 
manufacture of the atomic bomb, together with the 
known fact that we have a stockpile of bombs and 
continue to manufacture them, have increased Rus- 
sia’s mistrust of the United States. In all fairness, 
however, it must be said that some mistrust existed 
before Hiroshima, and that Russia, in turn, has 
taken a number of steps which have aroused mis- 
trust in the United States. While Mr. Baruch is 


NUREMBERG COURT APPLIES CONCEPT OF INDIVIDUAL WAR GUILT 


The verdict of the International Military Tri- 
bunal, announced at Nuremberg on October 1, raises 
many questions about the competence of the court 
and the concepts of law it was instructed to apply. 
Since the trials have established the guilt of 
only nineteen of the accused, allowing Franz von 
Papen, Hjalmar Schacht and Hans Fritzsche to go 
free, the judgment has also drawn the fire of those 
who would go further and punish countless lesser- 
known Germans who participated in and benefited 
by the Hitler régime during the period it was pre- 
paring for war. The decision of the court to free 
Schacht, in particular, makes it doubtful that other 
financiers or industrialists who supported the Nazi 
program will be brought to justice. The controversy 
which will doubtless follow about the innocence 
or guilt of such men may well merge with the dis- 
pute between Russia and the Western powers over 
Germany’s economic and political future. Senator 
Robert A. Taft’s charge on October 5 at Kenyon 
College that the trials were ex post facto proceed- 
ings indicates that they may also have domestic po- 
litical repercussions. 

LAW AND THE TRIALS. The Nuremberg Tri- 
bunal was established in August 1945 by a four- 
power agreement among France, Britain, Russia and 
the United States. On October 21, 1945 Justice Rob- 
ert H. Jackson, for the prosecution, read the indict- 
ment of the chief living Nazi spokesmen, charging 
that they had committed crimes against the peace and 
humanity, had waged aggressive war and violated 


— | _—_—_— 
right in his contention that the veto power would critics of 
nullify the effectiveness of international control over } ore viol 
the use of the new weapon, it was tactically unfop. crimes a 
tunate that the United States, irked by Russia’s fre. lenged, a 
quent invocation of the veto in the Security Counil, | ,.fore bi 
raised that issue in the Atomic Energy Commission, | the trial 
For this could readily be interpreted in Moscow as 4} on histo 
sinister backdoor move to deprive Russia of the veto | sion beer 
which, along with the United States, it had insisted scale. 
on including in the United Nations Charter. a 
Yet when all is said and done, the core of the prob. | _ nnitte 
lem is how to devise workable international contro = ai 
over the new source of energy which can both destroy vie ng 2 
and enhance human welfare. This problem cannot ne d 
be solved by the United States alone, for it involves oe -” 
sacrifice by both the United States and Russia of hich th 
what each considers part of its sovereignty. We have BA-not : 
something to yield with respect to our possession ris 
the secret of manufacturing the bomb, and Russig ken to 
(assuming that it has not yet discovered the secret), eto wh 
has something to yield with respect to its concept that ing war 
national control will be sufficient to give other na- ae ewes 
tions the feeling of security Russia itself demands. |) 5. ji 
VERA MICHELES DEAN Bitinn ¢ 
berg. T 
- os . though 
the rules of warfare. In appraising the acquittals or |" "© 
other decisions of the court, the precise character of #4 ony 
the indictments must be remembered and the nature | SYS © 
; ; ; . | Nureml 
of international law must be taken into consideration. |“ eg 
In a legal sense few observers will disagree with ad a 
Justice Jackson’s belief that the court’s action will : 
be important long after the accused individuals are} JUS1 
forgotten. Many laymen all over the world will also | sults of 
share his view that the court should have condemned 
all the defendants. For only a strict reading of the 
charges enabled a majority of the judges to find men| .. 
innocent-who had supported Hitler almost until the} ea" 
end. Some authorities in the English-speaking coum 
tries fear that the trials will make martyrs of the Published 
Nazi leaders. Lawyers, however, will applaud the} %* 
court’s attention to the details of legal procedure. | msonally 
Meticulous adherence to approved legal rules will | rouicy & 
avoid much subsequent criticism of the court's vet | sid publi 
dict. The careful documentation of the guilt of the bodied in 
Nazi leaders, which the court required, will itself |), 1: 
prove of value if the story thus revealed is ade |", *" 
quately interpreted, especially in Germany. Not the — 
least of the benefits derived from the trials is that eX | Managis 
perts representing widely different legal systems | Busines 
found it possible to approach a common problem | Forcien 
with a remarkable degree of agreement. a-Chat 
Outweighing all other considerations is the fact | iopmcp 
that the court has found the Nazi leaders responsible | esduar 
as individuals for crimes against the peace and | yaw ji 
against humanity. Because of the atrocities per 
petrated by the Nazis, there will be few, if any, | qm: 


—= 


r would 
rol over 
y un for. 
sia’s fre. 
Council, 
MASS10p, 
“OW aSqa 
the veto 
insisted 


he prob. 

control 
destroy 
1 Cannot 
involves 


JILT 


ittals or 
‘acter of 
e nature 
leration. 
‘ee with 
ion will 
uals are 
vill also 
demned 
r of the 
ind men 
intil the 
2 COU : 
of the 
aud the 
cedure, 
les will 
rt’s ver- 
t of the 
ll itself 
is ade 
Not the 
that ex 
systems 
>roblem 


the fact 
sonsible 
ice and 
es per: 
if any, 


a 
— 


critics of the court’s opinion that the laws of war 
were violated. The charges and decisions relating to 
crimes against humanity will also stand unchal- 
lenged, although comparable indictments were never 
before brought to the attention of such a tribunal. 
The trial records show, however, that never in mod- 
en history have murder, enslavement and persecu- 
tion been practiced so systematically and on so vast 
a scale. 

The court’s decision that the several individuals 
committed crimes against the peace is more difficult 
to sustain. In establishing individual guilt for pre- 
paring and waging aggressive war the court frankly 
assumed the role of a pioneer in developing inter- 
national law. Despite the Kellogg-Briand pact, to 
which the indictment referred, world public opinion 
did not consider war outlawed when Hitler came to 
Mower in 1933, nor had international measures been 


Piaken to prevent aggression. The debate will continue 


as to whether the court has acted ex post facto in call- 
ing war a crime and passing judgment on individuals. 
Yet even if the war crimes decision is unprecedented, 
it is time the precedent was set. This was the con- 
viction of the prosecution and the judges at Nurem- 
berg. The layman will support this approach, al- 
though he must look, as Justice Jackson has said, 
to wise statesmanship among the great powers to 
insure that this rule of law becomes a living reality. 
Nuremberg demonstrates especially that deterring 
war criminals is but a part of the struggle to pre- 
vent war. 


JUSTICE AT NUREMBERG. The immediate re- 


sults of the trials—death or imprisonment for some, 


Page Three 


a — 


freedom for others—at first appear unrelated to the 
broader legal concepts dealt with at Nuremberg. 
Precisely the opposite is true, however, since those 
who have been set free will be dangerous only if 
war again becomes possible because of German re- 
surgence or because the victors in World War Il 
are unable to agree among themselves about the 
bases of peace. It can be predicted with certainty, 
for example, that the debate over the Schacht ac- 
quittal will center on the divergent economic views 
held by the occupying powers. Schacht has left 
little to guesswork in this regard by his interview 
to the press on October 5, when he told reporters of 
his plans for the rebuilding of Germany's economy. 


Other disagreements may develop between Russia 
and the Western powers over German political 
trends resulting from the trials. For beyond acquit- 
ting three individuals the court did not make any 
group condemnation of Nazi or German organiza- 
tions such as the Elite Guard, the Storm Troopers 
or the General Staff. While on both the acquittals 
and the action taken on group bodies the Russian 
judge, Major General I. T. Nikitchenko, dissented, 
other trial courts may take their cue from the ma- 
jority decision and acquit Germans in large num- 
bers. German denazification courts are now taking 
steps to try Schacht and Fritzsche while von Papen 
remains temporarily in jail. But if, in the end, 
they are treated leniently and the great powers vie 
for the support of these individuals or groups in 
Germany, the Nuremberg trials will have failed in 
their purpose. 

GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


Statement of the Ownership, Management, Circulation, Etc., 
Required by the Acts of Congress of August 24, 1912 and 
March 8, 1933, of 


Foreign Policy Bulletin 
Published weekly at New York 16, N. Y. for October 1, 1946. 
State of New York, County of New York, ss. 


Before me, a Notary Public in and for the State and county aforesaid, 
personally appearéd Vera Micheles Dean, who, having been duly sworn ac- 
wrding to law, deposes and says that she is the Editor of the FOREIGN 
POLICY BULLETIN, and that the following is, to the best of her knowledge 
ind belief, a true statement of the ownership, management, etc., of the afore- 
aiid publication for the date shown in the above caption, required by the 
Act of August 24, 1912, as amended by the Act of March 3, 1933, em- 
bodied in Section 537, Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the re- 
verse of this form, to wit: 

1, That the names and addresses 
tr, and business managers are: 
_Publishers— Fooly Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, 
New York 16, N. Y. 

Editor—Vera Micheles Dean, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 

Managing Editor—None. 

Business Managers—None. 

2. That the owner is: 

Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, 
N. Y., the principal officers of which are: James Grafton Rogers, Director- 
m-Charge, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y.; Helen M. Daggett, 


of the publisher, editor, managing edi- 


Executive Secretary, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y.; and William 


A. Eldridge, Treasurer, 70 Broadway, New York 4, N. Y. 


3. That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders 
owning or holding 1 per cent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, 
— securities, are: 

one. 


4, That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, 
stockholders and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stock- 
holders and security holders as they appear upon the books of the company, 
but also, in cases where the stockholder or security holder appears upon the 
books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name 
of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; also 
that the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing affiant’s full 
knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions under which 
stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of the 
company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of 
a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to belleve that any other 


person, association, or corporation has any interest, direct or indirect, in the 
said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by her. 
5. That the average number of copies of each issue of this publication 


sold or distributed, 
} 


curing tne 


through the mails or otherwise, to paid subscribers 
twelve months preceding the date shown above is 31,000. 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated. 
By VERA MICHELES DEAN, Editor. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 12th day of September, 1946. 
{Seal} CAROLYN E. MARTIN, Notary Public. 


New York County, New York, County Clerk’s No. 365, New York County 
Reg. No. 164-M-7. (My commission expires March 30, 1947.) 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 52, Ocroner 11, 1946. 


> 181 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRanK Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; HELEN M. Daccett, Executive Secretary; VERA MICHELES 
DEAN, Editor. Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at ehe Pest Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Four Dollass a Year. 
Hease allow at least one month fer change ef address om membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Six Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Incorporated. National 


eer hs ee VR 


awn Se? 


PAS te Se eee ree es a PEE | ailing Smee 
. 


be mm, 


Washington News Letter 


stttes, 


piedeing, 


COPENHAGEN CONFERENCE URGES WORLD FOOD BOARD 


The United Nations are about to make a serious 
inquiry into the question whether individual nations 
should subordinate at least some aspects of their 
economies to regulation by an international body. 
Inspiration for this unusual step comes from a de- 
sire on the part of many governments, first, to free 
agricultural producers from the threat of declining 
prices —a threat which if realized might impair 
world economy; and, second, to invigorate their 

lations by improving the diets of the habitually 
“The United Nations Food and Agricul- 
ture Orpitibtion at its conference in Copenhagen, 
September 2 to 13, approved a report proposing the 
creation of a World Food Board with plenary pow- 
ers to integrate world agriculture, stimulate agri- 
cultural production, safeguard farmers from price 
declines and raise the world’s nutritional standards. 
The conference established a Preparatory Commis- 
sion which is to meet in Washington before Novem- 
ber 1 to make recommendations to member govern- 
ments on the manner in which a World Food Board 
might operate. 


NATIONAL VS. INTERNATIONAL CON- 
TROL. The idea of such an international board is 
not new. The League of Nations in 1937 favored 
a plan to ward off depressions by creating an agency 
authorized to buy unmarketable surplus agricultural 
commodities when prices were falling and to sell 
those commodities when prices rose beyond a pre- 
scribed level in order to stabilize trade. The United 
Kingdom delegation to the United Nations Confer- 
ence on Food and Agriculture in 1943 urged the 
establishment of a “‘buffer stock’’ board. In a report 
issued in April 1945 the U.S. Department of Agri- 
culture’s Interbureau Committee on Post-War Pro- 
grams supported the buffer-stocks scheme, and sug- 
gested that unmarketable surpluses be used ‘for the 
improvement of the diets and living standards of 
low-income groups in foreign countries, as well as in 
the United States.” While governments have not 
adopted previous proposals for such international 
action, many of the countries represented at the 
Copenhagen conference formally expressed their ap- 
proval of the World Food Board principle. 

National price-support controls over agricultural 
production and trade are now common throughout 
the world. The existence of national controls stimu- 
lates the demand for some sort of international con- 
trol because, as the Interbureau Committee stated in 


its 1945 report, “price supports, if they are use 
widely and without regard to their effects on othe 
countries, tend to lead to trade wars and to a 
vate world-surplus situations. The leading proposal 
for avoiding this . . . involve (1) relaxation of gop 
ernment intervention and (2) international arrange 
ments to coordinate intervention.” 


The proposal for a World Food Board, as pe 
sented to the Copenhagen conference by the FAQ 
Director-General, Sir John Boyd Orr, contemplatis) 
the coordination of state intervention. At the sam 
time the United States, in the “Suggested Chart 
for an International Trade Organization of th 
United Nations” published in September, stressg 
the desirability of relaxing government intervention 
in trade and in commodities that move in inter 
tional trade. “It seems unlikely that either the 
United States or other important producing coup 
tries would abandon, or even relax significantly, the 
measures of intervention in favor of their producers,’ 
the Interbureau Committee said in 1945. The FAO 
Preparatory Commission is not limited to consid 
eration of the Orr proposals. It will be free b 
judge between the merits of the two policies—to 
intervention, or international intervention. 


FAO CONFERENCE HEARTENING. The FAQ 
Conference, attended by voting delegations from 
thirty-three of its forty-seven member countrits, 
heartened the participants. The delegates, represent 
ing countries widely different in economic and sodiél 
structure and conditions, showed a ready grasp of 
the nature of the problem before them and acted 
with a determination to offer concrete remedial meas 
ures. They promptly resolved their many disagree 
ments and, having established the Preparatory Com 
mission, adjourned one day earlier than had been 
expected. The absence of Russia from the confer 
ence dismayed the delegates, but representatives of 
countries closely related to Russia—Poland, Czecho 
slovakia, Rumania and Hungary — attended; and 
Russia was invited to take part in the Preparatoy 
Commission. The work of the Commission will be te 
viewed by the individual governments represented 
on it and by the Economic and Social Council of the 
United Nations. 

BLAIR BOLLES | 


(Mr. Bolles has just returned from the FAO Conference 
in Copenhagen.) 


icies—no 


‘he FAO 
ns from 
countries, 
represent: 


disagree 
ory Com 
had been 
e confer 
tatives of 


reparatofy 
will be te 


nfere nce 


