









































* 


Ota 


ling 


'SSi- 


wn 
Zs, 


lew 


rk, 
ase 
ok- 
rial 
135. 
ued 


and 
ing 





Oe 


eee sie 


ay senna 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED 





VoL. XV, No. 32 


JUNE 5,°1936 4 





GREAT BRITAIN AND THE RACE PROBLEM 
IN PALESTINE 
by Elizabeth P. MacCallum 


Basic conflict of interests; Search for a clearly defined 
policy; The application of British policy; Land régime; 
Self-governing institutions. 


August 29, 1934 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at che Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











ibrary of Congress. 


ashington,. D. C- 











JAPAN DRIVES ON 


IN NORTH CHINA 





NCE again Japan has shifted the brunt of its 

attack from Outer Mongolia and the Soviet 
borders to north China. It now presses forward 
to exclude all Chinese and Western influence from 
this area. Japanese troops threaten a drive to 
eliminate the last vestiges of Nanking’s control 
in the north, while large-scale smuggling opera- 
tions are undermining British-American trade 
and investments throughout China. 

The immediate political crisis in north China 
is fraught with graver potentialities than at any 
time since 1933. Japan’s military preparations 
have proceeded methodically for several months 
with full Cabinet backing. A large barracks has 
been constructed at Tientsin to house the addi- 
tional Japanese troops whose dispatch was fore- 
told several weeks ago. Roughly 10,000 Japanese 
soldiers, or five times the normal quota, are now 
stationed in the Peiping-Tientsin area. A skeleton 
officer force, sufficient to take command of a 
large-sized army, has been assembled at Peiping 
and Tientsin. On the Chinese side, it is no longer 
certain that Nanking can avert a showdown by 
timely capitulation. The students are again 
demonstrating in Peiping, Tientsin and Shanghai, 
despite the drastic suppression meted out to them 
under the emergency measures promulgated by 
the Nanking government. Anti-Japanese senti- 
ment in north China is much more pronounced 
than in earlier years. The officers of the Twenty- 
ninth Army of General Sung Cheh-yuan, head of 
the Hopei-Chahar Council, are reported to be de- 
manding resistance to Japan. In this atmosphere 
the presentation of Japanese demands in connec- 
tion with the railway explosion near Tientsin, 
which bears suspicious similarities to the Mukden 
“incident” of September 18, 1931, might precipi- 
tate a widespread movement of Chinese military 
resistance. 

Underlying Japan’s moves in north China is 
the fear that Nanking is falling under Anglo- 
American influence, as the two Western powers 


seek to stave off the threat to their economic in- 
terests in China. The reality of this threat cannot 
be doubted. Smuggling has attained its greatest 
proportions only in recent months. What this 
means to foreign trade in China is shown by the 
effects of the lesser-scale smuggling of last year. 
A new estimate by the Bank of China sets the 
value of Japanese goods smuggled into China dur- 
ing 1935 at 63 million dollars. If Japan’s legiti- 
mate exports are added, the total value of Jap- 
anese goods sold to China in 1935 exceeded 100 
million dollars, giving Japan first place by a wide 
margin. On the other hand, United States ex- 
ports to China for 1935 were cut nearly in half, 
declining to 38 million dollars from 69 million in 
1934. Britain’s exports to China also suffered, 
while even more serious concern is felt in London 
over the drastic decline in Chinese customs rev- 
enues as a result of the increased smuggling in 
1936. Most of the Chinese customs revenue goes 
to service foreign loans, a considerable propor- 
tion of which is held in London. In short, Japan 
has discovered a new technique for closing the 
“open door” in China. 

Under present circumstances, neither Britain 
nor the United States can exert sufficient direct 
pressure to call a halt to Japan. Tokyo has 
bluntly rejected the recent series of Anglo- 
American verbal protests on the smuggling issue. 
Until lately, moreover, British and American 
differences over the silver question have stood in 
the way of a concerted effort to bolster Nanking’s 
resistance to Japanese aggression. China’s “man- 
aged currency” reform of last November, carried 
out under British auspices, was intended to relieve 
Nanking of fiscal difficulties which had been in- 
tensified by the American silver purchase policy. 
It may also have looked toward linking the Chinese 
currency with sterling. When the United States 
limited its silver purchases from the London mar- 
ket, this scheme fell through. As a result, 
Nanking turned directly to the United States 


i nbalnSe, 


a> 


















Treasury, which purchased 50 million ounces of 
China’s silver in November 1935. Further con- 
ferences led on May 18 to an agreement by which 
the Treasury will continue to purchase silver from 
China at market prices. The proceeds will be 
maintained chiefly in New York and used for 
Chinese currency stabilization purposes. Thus, 
such foreign control over China’s currency as may 
exist will rest in American rather than British 
hands. 

This issue illustrates the dangerous game of 
power-politics which has developed in the Far 
East, with each power jockeying for position at 
the expense of the rest. The success of Japan’s 
aggression has rested mainly on the differences 
which separate the United States, Britain and the 
Soviet Union, the three powers primarily affected. 
Two months ago Japan was striking at the Soviet 
Union; today it strikes at Britain and the United 
States, which clearly occupy the more vulnerable 
position. With the League unable to intervene in 
the Far East, only concerted Anglo-American- 
Soviet action independently of Geneva can check 
Japan. It may well be that such action represents 
the last hope of reversing the steady drift toward 
war in the Far East. For unless this is achieved 
Japan can pick its time and opponent at leisure. 
In the resulting conflagration, an American “neu- 
trality” policy may prove as weak a reed as it did 


in 1914-1917. T. A. BIsson 


RACIAL CONFLICT RENDS PALESTINE 


Palestine is again seething with unrest. The 
immediate cause of the present outbreak was a 
demonstration staged on April 17 at the funeral 
of a Jew killed by Arab brigands. Two days later 
the first serious riot occurred in Jaffa, where the 
Jewish quarter was burned and its inhabitants 
were forced to flee to the neighboring all-Jewish 
city of Tel-Aviv. Since then there have been al- 
most daily disturbances, accompanied by sys- 
tematic destruction of Jewish-owned crops, 
sabotaging of Jewish business, and a thorough- 
going Arab general strike. Half a hundred lives 
and thousands of dollars in property and com- 
merce have been lost. 

Previous disturbances, in 1920-1921, 1929 and 
1933, were all provoked by the same difficulties 
which underlie the present trouble: conflict be- 
tween two races, each claiming Palestine as its 
homeland—the Jews fortified by the Balfour 
Declaration of 1917 and the terms of the League 
mandate, the Arabs by thirteen centuries of occu- 
pation; and the resentment of both Jews and 
Arabs over Britain’s failure to grant them au- 
tonomy. On several occasions—most recently in 


Page Two 








December 1935—the British have proposed a 
legislative council as a first step toward represen- 
tative government, only to encounter opposition 
aroused by racial antagonism. They have conse- 
quently governed the Palestine mandate through 
a High Commissioner with almost unlimited 
powers. Despite the prosperity which Zionists 
have brought to Palestine, the Arabs demand ces- 
sation of land sales to Jews and resent the Jewish 
policy of employing only Jewish labor. 

While the outbreak which has raged for the 
past six weeks may be explained in terms of race 
conflict and political agitation, several factors 
make it more intense and bitter than former 
troubles. Jewish immigration has markedly in- 
creased since Hitler’s accession to power: the 
annual total, averaging under 7,000 before 1933 
(except for the 1925 influx of 33,000 Polish Jews), 
jumped to 38,000 in 1933, 42,300 in 1934, and 
over 61,500 in 1935; it will be about 40,000 this 
year. The pan-Arab movement has been greatly 
strengthened recently by the increased political 
power of the Arabs of Iraq and Saudi Arabia, 
and by the decline of Britain’s prestige, princi- 
pally because of its apparent defeat in the Ethi- 
opian affair. Pan-Moslemism, although at present 
a less important factor than the Arab political 
movement, has contributed to the Palestine unrest 
by sympathetic agitation in Transjordania, Egypt 
and Syria. Britain has openly charged Italy with 
fomenting the present agitation, and observers 
believe that these charges have some element of 
truth. Moreover, a new generation of young mili- 
tants has succeeded in imposing unaccustomed 
unity on the various Arab factions. 

The British, having stated emphatically, both 
in Parliament and through the High Commission- 
er in Palestine, that they would not yield to vio- 
lence, have brought about 5,000 troops from 
Egypt, enforced strict curfew in the towns af- 
fected by riots, and threatened to apply the regu- 
lar semi-annual quota list, permitting some 20,000 
Jews to enter the country by October 1, a con- 
siderable increase over the previous six months. 
For the future, they have promised to appoint a 
royal commission, with full powers, as soon as 
order is restored. Both Jews and Arabs, remem- 
bering previous investigations which did not ap- 
preciably alter the situation, doubt that this com- 
mission can succeed in solving the problems of 


Palestine. HELEN FISHER 





The Basis of Japanese Foreign Policy, by Albert E. Hind- 
marsh. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1936. 
$2.50 
A study of the problems of population, industrialization 

and foreign trade underlying Japanese expansion. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XV, No. 32, JuNE $, 1936. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesure Bugit, President; EstHeR G. OGpen, Secretary; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











