



| A En Sa 





rcial 
reral 
tion 
y on 
ate, 
alize 
for 
pon- 
yerty 
ugh 
uate 

the 
ated 
) per 
keen 
tries 
must 
e in- 
rane: 


ES 





Genera] Library 


JL 11: 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


Vnlversity of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Miek 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 














An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIV, No. 37 


JUNE 29, 1945 





CHARACTER OF UNCIO CHARTER SHOULD ASSURE SUPPORT BY CONGRESS 


HE settlement in Moscow, on June 22, of the 

controversy over composition of the Polish gov- 
erment, which had repeatedly threatened the unity 
of the Big Three, loomed more important in this 
week’s headlines than the termination of the two- 
months’ United Nations Conference on International 
Organization in San Francisco on June 26. Yet the 
two events are intimately related. For the deadlock 
over the Polish situation reached in April by the 
tripartite Moscow Commission might not have been 
broken so swiftly if the great powers concerned had 
not had the opportunity to canvass the world situa- 
tion at leisure as they did at the UNCIO conference 
which reflected, as in a microcosm, the strains and 
stresses of post-war Europe. The Russians were able 
to observe at close range how their abrupt unilat- 
etal actions affect other peoples—even those most 
eager for friendship with the U.S.S.R. Western na- 
tions, for their part, learned at first hand the urgent 
teality of Russia's preoccupation with security 
against the renewal of German aggression. The con- 
ference itself, as it proceeded after an initial period 
charged with suspicion about the Soviet govern- 
ment’s intentions, appears to have convinced Russia 
that other countries are determined to build an effec- 
tive system of collective security with it, and not 
against it, as frequently suspected in Moscow. 

It is this give and take—the slow, often tedious, 
almost always unglamorous process of mutual con- 
cession and compromise—that represents the great- 
est single achievement of San Francisco. The Big 
Four had been in a position to impose on other coun- 
ties, by force if necessary, the concept of interna- 
tional organization they had previously embodied in 
the Dumbarton Oaks proposals of October 9, 1944; 
and the Russians, unaccustomed at home to parlia- 
mentary debate, found it particularly difficult to 
understand the reason for submission of these pro- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


posals to discussion, and even amendment, by small 
countries lacking military and industrial resources to 
wage war. Yet the great powers wisely recognized 
that a world order built without the voluntary coop- 
eration of the small and middle nations would be 
built on sand. 

ESSENCE OF DUMBARTON OAKS KEPT. 
The core of the Dumbarton Oaks proposals is te- 
tained essentially unaltered in the Charter of the 
United Nations. The principal organ—for the time 
being at least—is to be the Security Council, in 
which the Big Five will have permanent seats, and 
will be able to exercise a broad right of veto. It is a 
misapprehension to believe that Russia alone among 
the great powers insisted on retention of a strong 
veto power; for many Americans, including some of 
the members of the United States delegation, have 
taken the view that without provision for veto power 
the Senate might not ratify the Charter. The long 
and intensive debate about the veto concerned not 
the Big Five’s veto on use of military force, but their 
right to veto discussion and investigation of con- 
troversies regarded as a threat to peace, especially 
when they are not involved in such controversies. 
Here again the difference of view between Russia, 
on the one hand, and the Western powers on the 
other, can best be understood by bearing in mind 
that Russia has had little experience with the process 
of political debate, and is determined that the new 
organization should have as much authority centered 
in the Security Council as possible. 

EMPHASIS ON HUMAN RIGHTS. At the 
same time, the Dumbarton Oaks proposals have been 
liberalized in five main respects, at the demand of 
the small and middle nations, backed by public opin- 
ion in Britain and the United States. First, a con- 
certed effort was made to expand a document 
forged in time of war, and consequently focused on 
































a; 
: 
. 
é 


Nek aaa iaceenses 


Biter eda 





oo RRR FRONT TOES 








the task of averting future wars by the use of mili- 
tary force, into a document whose stated objec- 
tives are protection of human rights, defense of the 
dignity of the individual, and advancement of social 
and economic welfare. Peace, in other words, is to 
be not merely order imposed by force, but order 
based on justice. The cynic might murmur: “words, 
words, words.” And it is obvious that, if there is no 
will on the part of the various nations to make the 
Charter work, the fine sentiments expressed in the 
preamble will prove so much waste paper. But this 
should only challenge us, and the peoples of other 
nations, to practice our ideals, not merely rehearse 
them in eloquent phrases. It is encouraging that de- 
termined pressure for inclusion of the concepts of 
justice and human welfare in the Charter was 
brought to bear on the United States delegation 
by consultants representing forty-two national or- 
ganizations which had been invited by the State 
Department to present the views of their constitu- 
ents. This experiment in establishing a link between 
public opinion and officials representing the people 
at an international conference proved so successful 
that it should be repeated at future gatherings—and 
extended to include public opinion representatives 
of the other United Nations. 

ASSEMBLY’S DISCUSSION SCOPE BROAD- 
ENED. Second, the General Assembly, which under 
the Dumbarton Oaks proposals was slated for a 
tubber-stamp role, is to become a forum for dis- 
cussion of “any questions or any matters within the 
scope of the Charter.” The Assembly will be free 
to consider any question relating to the maintenance 
of international peace and security, to bring any such 
question to the attention of the Security Council, and 
to make recommendations, provided the question is 
not at that time being considered by the Council. 
Here again the provisions of the Charter could remain 
a dead letter if the nations should be apathetic about 
using the General Assembly as their sounding-board. 
The lively debates over the veto power, over region- 
alism versus collective security, over trusteeships, 
which marked the San Francisco negotiations, are a 
hopeful portent of the scope of discussion that may 
be expected to develop in the General Assembly once 
the United Nations organization gets into full swing. 

The Charter, moreover, in contrast to the Dum- 
barton Oaks document, provides that the Secretary 
General is to furnish information concerning the ac- 
tivities and decisions of the Security Council to the 
General Assembly, which shall be empowered to ap- 
prove or disapprove, make recommendations and 
observations, and submit recommendations to the 
Security Council “with a view to insuring complete 
observance of the duties of the Security Council in- 
herent in its responsibilities to maintain international 
peace and security.” The General Assembly is thus 





Page Two 








i. 
et 


given a role corresponding, in international affairs 
to that of a national legislature in a democratic 
country, which has the right to initiate measures of 
its own as well as to scrutinize the actions ang 
policies of the executive. 

NEW ROLE FOR ECONOMIC COUNCIL 
Third, the Economic and Social Council, which had 
been hastily included in the Dumbarton Oaks pro. 
posals as a sort of appendage to the General As. 
sembly, has been made one of the ‘‘principal organs” 
of the organization. This is particularly important 
because the Economic and Social Council is to be 
composed of eighteen members elected by the Gen. 
eral Assembly, without any reference to whether 
they are great or small powers, and in that sense will 
be a more democratic organ than the Security Coun. 
cil. The scope of its functions has also been greatly 
broadened, thanks to a number of proposals, the 
most interesting and elaborate of which was sub. 
mitted by Canada. True, the Economic and Social 
Council has powers of recommendation only, and 
will have to act through technical agencies like the 
Food and Agriculture Organization, UNRRA, and 
others that would be brought into relationship with 
the United Nations organization. But if the United 
Nations so desire, this Council could become a pow- 
erful instrumentality for dealing with the multifari- 
ous economic and social problems cutting across 
boundary lines which the war has left in its wake 
and which, if not alleviated, bear within them the 
seeds of another war. 

TRUSTEESHIP CHAPTER ADDED. Fourth, the 
Charter contains an entirely new chapter on trustee 
ships for dependent peoples—a subject not men- 
tioned in the Dumbarton Oaks proposals. This chap- 
ter was originally prepared by the United States, 
primarily to reconcile this country’s desire, on secut- 
ity grounds, to control the Japanese mandated 
islands with its Atlantic Charter pledge not to ag- 
grandize its territory. It had been hoped to hold a 
conference of colonial powers on the eve of the Saa 
Francisco meeting, but the death of President Roose: 
velt and other developments prevented fulfilment of 
this plan. The trusteeship proposals of the United 
States, although couched in general terms, were de- 
signed to meet the situation not of all colonies, but 
of the Pacific islands, which for the most part have 
few or no inhabitants, and therefore do not raise 
the usual problems of Western rule over native 
peoples. The chapter on trusteeships finally incor 
porated into the Charter establishes a trusteeship sys 
tem for certain categories of territories, notably tet- 
ritories taken from enemy states, and distinguishes, 
in accordance with a formula proposed by the United 
States, between strategic areas, to be supervised by 
the Security Council, and non-strategic areas to be 
supervised by the General Assembly through a Trus 


teesh: 
to ex: 
colon 
or no 
bility 
“acce 
of ci 
being 
the 1 
Coun 
torie: 
beyo 
ever, 
at Si 
enem 
place 
trast 
date: 
to a 
Leag 


FIEI 
betw 
been 
prof 
exist 
Frar 
nota 
at tl 
secu 
state 
with 
Yug 
sive 
sitic 
Nat 


ern 




















i 


atic 
: of 
and 


AL, 
had 
Dr. 


”» 


tant 
be 
7€N- 
ther 
will 
yun. 
atly 

the 
Sub- 
cial 
and 

the 
and 
with 
ited 
0W- 
fari- 
“ross 
vake 
- the 


, the 
stee- 
nen- 
hap- 
ates, 
ecut- 
lated 
) ag: 
Id a 
» San 
nse: 
nt of 
nited 
e de- 
, but 
have 
raise 
ative 
ncor- 
) Sys 
y ter- 
ishes, 
nited 
>d by 
to be 
T rus 











a 
— 





teeship Council. The only important reference made 
to existing colonies is a declaration applicable to all 
colonial territories, whether placed under trusteeship 
or not, to the effect that states which have responsi- 
bility for territories inhabited by dependent peoples 
“accept the general principle that it is a sacred trust 
of civilization to promote to the utmost the well- 
being of the inhabitants of these territories within 
the world community.” By giving the Trusteeship 
Council the right to investigate conditions in terri- 
tories placed under its supervision, the Charter goes 
beyond the League Covenant. In other respects, how- 
ever, it may prove less broad, since countries which, 
at subsequent peace conferences, receive former 
enemy territories, are not automatically bound to 
place them under the Trusteeship Council—in con- 
trast to 1919 when countries which received man- 
dates over former German or Turkish territories had 
to administer them under the supervision of the 
League Mandates Commission. 


REGIONAL SECURITY MEASURES CLARI- 
FIED. Finally, the Charter clarifies the relationship 
between regional and collective security which had 
been left relatively obscure in the Dumbarton Oaks 
proposals, and had been further confused by the 
existence of bilateral security agreements, like the 
Franco-Russian alliance, and regional security pacts, 
notably the Act of Chapultepec concluded in March 
at the Mexico City Conference. Under the Charter 
security agreements directed against former enemy 
states (this would include the pacts signed by Russia 
with Britain, France, Czechoslovakia, Poland and 
Yugoslavia) can be used “against renewal of aggres- 
sive policy on the part of such states” during a tran- 
sitional period, ‘until such time as tt [United 
Nations} organization may, on request of the gov- 
ements concerned, be charged with the respon- 





FOR JULY 15 publication— 


THE SAN FRANCISCO CONFERENCE 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


(For the first five weeks of the Conference, Mrs. Dean 
attended as an accredited press representative.) 


25¢ 


A clear, brief survey of the Charter for International 
Organization drawn up at San Francisco. Cuts through 
a mass of technical information. This Foreign Policy 
Report includes text of the Charter. 

Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 E. 38th St., New York 16 














Page Three — 





sibility for preventing further aggression by a state 
now at war with the United Nations.” To reassure 
the Latin American countries that the Act of Chapul- 
tepec would not be left out of the picture, the 
Charter also states than nothing in its terms “im- 
pairs the inherent right of individual or collective 
self-defense if an armed attack occurs against a 
member state, until the Security Council has taken 
the measures ‘necessary to maintain international 
peace and security.” These two formulas, necessarily 
complex because of the complex situations they 
sought to cover, may lead to controversies in the 
future. The important thing, however, is that the 
primacy of collective, over regional and bilateral, 
security arrangements has been recognized. 


The Charter is not intended to be a rigid, unilat- 
eral document. The United Nations will have an 
Opportunity to review their San Francisco work at 
the end of ten years—a period during which, it is 
hoped, the world will have achieved a measure of 
stability and recovery. A general conference of the 
United Nations can then be summoned by a two- 
thirds vote of the General Assembly, with the con- 
currence of any seven members of the Security Coun- 
cil, thus removing the danger that the Big Five might 
veto an amendment convention. Any alterations of 
the Charter recommended by a two-thirds vote of 
the conference, like the Charter itself, shall take 
effect when ratified by the Big Five and by a ma- 
jority of the other member states. 


Now that the arduous labors of San Francisco are 
over, the labors of ratifying the Charter begin— 
first of all in Washington. President Truman is 
anxious to have the United States ratify the Charter 
first and thus give the world assurance that this time 
we will collaborate with other nations not only in 
war, but also in peace. Seldom have relations be- 
tween the President and Congress been so harmoni- 
ous and understanding, and while this situation lasts 
Mr. Truman may well succeed in his undertaking. 
Even if it should prove impossible for the Senate to 
ratify the Charter by July 15, in time for the Big 
Three meeting in Berlin, the public should support 
the President’s request that the Senate remain in 
session until it has ratified the document—backed by 
political leaders of both parties on a non-partisan 
basis—which creates the structure of the United Na- 
tions organization. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 37, JuNE 29, 1945. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lggt, Secretary; VERA MicHsLes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


sccond-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


> 181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 





Washington News Letter 














POLISH ACCORD REVEALS EFFICACY OF U.S. INTERVENTION IN EUROPE 


The agreement reached on June 22 among Amer- 
ican, British and Russian government representatives 
on the establishment of a new Polish régime will 
furnish a practical test as to whether the United 
States has effectively advanced the free elections 
principle. The United States has traditionally sup- 
ported this democratic principle in its relations with 
other nations. The authors of the Atlantic Charter 
said in 1941 that they “respect the right of all 
peoples to choose the form of government under 
which they live.” President Roosevelt, Prime Min- 
ister Churchill and Marshal Stalin reaffirmed the 
principle last February in the Crimea Declaration 
on Liberated Europe, which aimed at “the earliest 





ored by Moscow—and thereby turn American public 
opinion against Russia, or he could press Marshal 
Stalin for a change in that régime and thereby rp 
the risk of widening the gulf between the Soviet and 
American governments, at a time when he was bend. 
ing every effort to bring them closer together. He 
chose to press upon Stalin the principle of free elec. 
tions, in the Western sense, which the Soviet Uniog, 
at least in its internal affairs, does not regard 4s 
an essential part of the democratic process. 

The Crimea Declaration on Poland provided 
that the government of national unity should “be 
pledged to the holding of free and unfettered elec. 
tions as soon as possible on the basis of universal 


suffrage and the secret ballot.” Full realization of | Sx 
this pledge in Poland might alter the nature of the | ™0 
Soviet Union’s influence in Eastern Europe, where} 9° 
governments today look for leadership exclusively} Peo 
to Russia. For whereas the Polish government ¢ ) ht 
tablished by the recent agreement in Moscow is but | 
a revised version of the Warsaw régime originally | bet 
sponsored by the Soviet government, a régime estab- and 
lished on the basis of free elections might display} Po 
nationalistic independence. The United States and whe 
Britain are withholding official recognition of the} ™* 
interim government of national unity until it has the 
fixed a date for elections. oa 

OTHER QUESTIONS FOR U.S. IN EUROPE | ©" 
Many problems remain in Europe to challenge the they 
diplomatic skill of the United States. For one thing, Wh 
Washington is considering whether to propose in- 
tervention in Belgium, where the determination of 
King Leopold III to resume his throne in the faceof} , * 
strong popular opposition might create an internal bee 
political crisis. In addition to obtaining acceptance the 
of the principle of free elections by other countries, dra 
the United States may have to decide whether tt 
should check on the conduct of elections to determine ) © 
if they are honestly held. And, if extremist groups ple 
should win most European elections, the United 


possible establishment through free elections of gov- 
ernments responsive to the will of the people.” 


POLISH SETTLEMENT ESSENTIAL TO 
UNITY. The understanding on Poland should en- 
courage Americans to abandon recent doubts about 
the wisdom of this country’s intervention in Euro- 
pean affairs. Disagreement over Poland has dis- 
turbed relations between the Soviet Union, on the 
one hand, and the United States and Britain, on the 
other, since April 26, 1943, when the Kremlin sev- 
ered relations with the Polish government-in-exile in 
London, which the other allies continued to recog- 
nize. At the Yalta Conference Roosevelt, Churchill 
and Stalin agreed to resolve the issue by establish- 
ing a commission that would reorganize the pro- 
visional Polish régime in Warsaw, recognized by 
Moscow, “on a broader democratic basis with the 
inclusion of democratic leaders from Poland itself 
and from Poles abroad.’ The commission met so 
many obstacles in the course of its negotiations that 
the United States only two months ago began to 
think a solution was almost impossible. However, 
the patience, determination and diplomatic skill of 
Harry Hopkins, whom President Truman sent to 
Moscow in May, brought the negotiations to a suc- 


is for their decision. These are entirely matters for 
them.” 


for Roosevelt when he went to the Crimea. He could 


either accept the Warsaw régime—the course fav- BLAIR BOLLES } ¢, 


b cessful conclusion with the creation of a provisional . 

et Polish government of national unity along the lines States may be urged by some groups here to abam “4 . 
3 set forth in the Yalta agreement. don that complete neutrality regarding the out] | 
‘$ This assertion of American interest in a European come of elections which Secretary of State Stettinius is 

¥ problem was an experimental diplomatic venture enunciated last December 7 about Greece, when he -. 
i into the heart of a continent whose activities we have said: “Whether the Greek people form themselves tior 
id tended to criticize in the past without ourselves as- into a rene + or republic is 1 see" hee Se 
: ibili Whether they form a government of the right or le : 
: suming any responsibility. Poland posed a dilemma y & | * 


FOR VICTORY °* 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


ans 
sa 








