= 


e to 
tish 
text 


t to 
Vies 


Ness 
am. 


nese 





vere 
ized 


rive 


rdly | 
cade | 
ain 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





Vou. XVIII, No. 43 Aucust 18, 1939 





Ee 


GERMANY’S COLONIAL CLAIMS IN AFRICA 
by Paul B. Taylor 


Should Germany’s former colonies be returned to her, 
or are other alternatives possible? This report weighs 
the justice of the German claims against the opposing 
views of the mandatory powers. 


August 15 issue of FOREIGN POLICY REPORTS .. . 25 cents 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


ANE 9&9 1920 











Genera: wWsorary 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











AXIS DRIVE SHIFTS TO 


SOUTHEAST 





T HE meagre reports on the three-day conversations 
between the Italian and German Foreign Min- 
isters which ended on August 13 have done little to 
relieve the current uncertainty in Europe. The length 
of the talks and the fact that repeated consultation 
with the Fuehrer and I/ Duce proved necessary sug- 
gest only that Italy and Germany may not see eye to 
eye on their future course of action. While the Italian 
press continues to stress the identity of views between 
the two allies, the Rome government is apparently 
very reluctant to become involved in war at this 
moment. It realizes that much of the warfare would 
center in the Mediterranean, where Italy would have 
to bear the brunt of a joint attack by France, Britain 
and Turkey. Germany, on the other hand, would be 
much less exposed and could carry the initial fighting 
to Poland. 


THE DANZIG CONFLICT ADJOURNED? Un- 
der these circumstances Count Ciano and Joachim 
von Ribbentrop may have discussed possibilities of 
shifting their attention to southeastern Europe where 
an advance is less likely to precipitate war. Available 
evidence indicates that Germany also may consider 
the Danzig nut too hard to crack for the moment. The 
speech delivered on August 10 by Albert Forster, the 
Danzig Nazi leader, immediately after his return 
from a conference with Hitler, certainly suggested 
that the German government is not yet prepared to 
take decisive measures. Moreover, the Danzig au- 
thorities beat a hasty retreat after Poland had threat- 
ened to prevent the execution of an order barring 
Polish customs inspectors from the Danzig-East 
Prussia frontier. The Danzig government is now ap- 
parently trying to reach some peaceful adjustment of 
the many customs disputes which have marred rela- 
tions with Warsaw. While Germany may avoid war- 
like provocations, it will unquestionably keep up a 
policy of steady pressure against Poland in the hope 


that Warsaw will crack under the strain and even- 
tually consent to negotiate. 


HUNGARY AND YUGOSLAVIA HARD 
PRESSED. Meanwhile, the Reich aims to encircle 
Poland from the south by linking Hungary to the 
Rome-Berlin axis. When Count Csaky, the Hungarian 
Foreign Minister, visited von Ribbentrop at Salzburg 
on August 8, he seems to have been told that Berlin 
fully expects Budapest to join the German-Italian 
military alliance. While the Hungarians dislike the 
Germans and have been on good terms with the Poles, 
they may have no alternative but to accept the Ger- 
man demand. Without a guarantee of assistance from 
France and Britain, resistance would be suicidal. The 
Reich absorbs the greater part of Hungary's exports 
of grain and livestock, and could thus easily apply the 
economic screws. By supporting the Hungarian Nazis 
and the German minority numbering 500,000 it can 
continue to create countless difficulties for the Buda- 
pest government. The exploitation of agrarian dis- 
content in a country where one-third of the land is 
in huge estates constitutes another method of exert- 
ing political pressure. In return for compliance with 
its demands, Berlin can hold out to Budapest the bait 
of additional territorial gains at the expense of 
Rumania. 

Yugoslavia, the richest state in southeastern Eu- 
rope and the strategic gateway to the Balkans, is also 
coveted by Germany. Caught between Italy and Ger- 
many, this country has striven to maintain its neu- 
trality without daring to accept a guarantee from 
France and Britain. According to rumors circulated 
last week, the Rome-Berlin axis has demanded that 
Belgrade commit itself to a policy of “benevolent 
neutrality.” In the event of war Yugoslavia would 
be compelled to furnish facilities for the trans- 
portation of troops and war material across its terri- 
tory to Rumania, Bulgaria and the Dardanelles. The 





“ =~ a 








Belgrade government may appeal for aid to London 
and Paris, but its ability to obtain assistance and resist 
the Rome-Berlin axis is seriously jeopardized by the 
unsatisfied demands of five million Croats for auton- 
omy within Yugoslavia. Under pressure from the 
Serb General Staff and the Serb bureaucracy, Prince 
Paul, the Regent, appears again to have rejected the 
agreement recently negotiated by Premier Cvetko- 
vitch with the Croat leader, Dr. Matchek. While the 
latter is unlikely to carry out his threat to invoke 
German intervention, the Croats may well follow the 
precedent set by the Slovaks in Czechoslovakia and 
refuse to lift a hand to save Yugoslavia from dis- 


integration. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


U.S. URGES MEXICAN OIL SETTLEMENT 


The long-standing dispute between the Mexican 
government and the oil companies entered a new 
phase on August 14 when Acting Secretary of State 
Welles intervened with a statement urging settle- 
ment. Shortly after expropriation of the foreign- 
owned properties in March 1938, Secretary Hull in- 
sisted that Mexico give “prompt, adequate and effec- 
tive’” compensation for the properties, but negotia- 
tions looking toward a settlement have been left 
mainly to the parties involved. Mr. Welles has now 
revealed, however, that the recent proposal to place 
the properties under the administration of a nine- 
man board originated in the State Department. This 
board was to have been composed of three representa- 
tives of the Mexican government, three members se- 
lected by the oil companies and three “neutral” mem- 
bers—not of Mexican, American, British or Dutch 
nationality—chosen from a panel agreed upon by the 
American and Mexican governments. Although the 
plan first appeared to have the support of the Mex- 
ican government, it was rejected flatly by the oil com- 
panies, and the long negotiations threatened to end 
in a complete deadlock. The intervention by the State 
Department is designed to keep negotiations open 
and, in a larger sense, prevent aggravation of a con- 
flict which endangers friendly relations between the 
United States and Mexico. Fear that the refusal of 
the oil companies to handle shipments from their 
former properties will drive Mexico into closer rela- 
tions with the Fascist bloc doubtless is also reflected 
in the State Department's attitude. 


The issue has now passed far beyond that of finan- 
cial compensation for the properties seized. It has be- 
come a test of strength between the corporations and 
the Mexican State, and thus far neither side has indi- 





Page Two —. 





— 


cated any willingness to compromise. From the stand. by 





point of revenues, the Mexican properties are of rely. §NBA 


tively small concern to either the Royal Dutch or the 
Standard Oil Company of New Jersey—the principal 
corporate interests involved in the dispute. The prece. 
dent implicit in the Mexican action, however, has 
caused deep concern, not only among the oil com. 
panies but among other corporations with Latip 
American properties. The American oil interests have, 
therefore, spared no pains to undermine the Mexicay 
government’s position by economic boycott, in which 
they have been joined by various other corporate in. 
terests, and by propaganda in this country. Virtually 
every week since expropriation, for example, the 
Standard Oil Company of New Jersey has issued 4 
clip sheet containing reprints of news items and edi 
torials from the American and Mexican press, either 
opposing the government's oil policy or discrediting 
the country on other grounds. 


Reflecting contracted foreign markets and a prob. 
able loss in efficiency resulting from the change in 
management after expropriation, Mexican crude oil 
production dropped 18 per cent in 1938, and new 
drilling has virtually ceased. In January 1939 output 
was 32 per cent lower than a year earlier, and the 
number of producing wells was only 697 as against 
997 in January 1938. With normal export trade chan- 
nels disrupted by the boycott imposed by the former 
producers, shipments abroad declined 41 per cent in 
volume in 1938, while the value dropped from 162, 
000,000 pesos in 1937 to 79,700,000 pesos, or from 
18 per cent to 914 per cent of total exports. The loss 
of this trade is a serious blow to Mexico, particularly 
when added to the reduction in the price paid for 


silver by the United States Treasury, and it is doubt. | 


ful that the former export volume will be regained 
in the near future. Some encouragement, however, is 
offered by the reported deal with Brazil, under which 
the latter would purchase about 5,500,000 barrels of 
Mexican oil annually, or over one-third of 1938 ex 


ports. Despite wide publicity given to shipments of | 


Mexican oil to Germany, the 1938 total was only 
slightly greater in value than that for 1937, and about 
one-eighth of aggregate foreign shipments. 


Howarp J. TRUEBLOOD 





The Sugar Economy of Puerto Rico, by Arthur D. Gayer, 
Paul T. Homan, and Earle K. James. New York, Colum- 
bia University Press, 1938. $3.75 
The authors clearly set forth the problems of our 


poverty-ridden possession, but are rather timid about offer- 
ing specific remedies. 











FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 43, AuGust 18, 1939. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Franx Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Leet, Secretary; Vera MICHELES DEAN, Béitor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Be 


F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 





on A 
com 


Krer 
Fran 
agal 
Sovi 
its f 


repc 


fron 
pres 
“det 
are 

qua: 
helc 


zig, 
mili 
Pol: 
the 


Ccair 


| fror 
, tror 
| on 


| ing 


tier 
Slo 
hig 
Pol 
fac 


gat 


all 
res 





