FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 








Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 














General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michizan 











BERLIN JOLTS BRUSSELS 














= An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
had} Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 
ause p oF MICIROREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
nck, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
ssed 
end} ‘You. XVII, No. 3 NoveMser 12, 1937 
con 
npli- NEW YORK MEETING DATES 
>rted November 13 February 5 
otla- December 4 February 26 
‘land January 8 March 12 
January 22 March 26 
uined Mark these dates on your calendar NOW for the stimulating 
etted and timely discussions at the Hotel Astor. 
r Eu. 
tha} == 
ium’s 
down 
= into action by the announcement, on 
EN November 4, that Germany had offered its ser- 
vices as mediator in the Sino-Japanese conflict, the 
Brussels Conference meekly swallowed the rebuff of 
German and Japanese refusals to attend its sessions 
chray.| and renewed its efforts for Japanese cooperation in 
, | achieving a settlement. In a note dispatched from 
Dif-| Brussels on November 6 the Conference acknowl- 
ze P.| edged Japan’s negative response of October 28 to 
ouncil,} the Belgian invitation; emphasized in conciliatory 
| fashion that Tokyo’s disclaimer of territorial ambi- 
procal} tions in China conforms with the terms of the Nine 
spects,| Power Treaty; and virtually invited Japan to name 
nehart,| a small group of powers with which it was asked 
rerally| © OPM negotiations in order to facilitate pacific 
itution| Settlement. As the situation now stands, Germany 
f com-| and the Brussels Conference are thus in a sense 
competing for the privilege of mediating the dispute. 
Cam- , 
3.00 Early reports that the conference, which opened 
ization) on November 3, might serve to curb the arrogance 
a of Fascist dictatorships by strengthening the tenuous 
community of interest among the democratic pow- 
editors} €fS were soon belied by the course of events. In 
red A.| the opening session it became apparent that the 
delegates were split into three camps. The keynote 
ld, by speech for the Western democracies, made by Nor- 
versity | man H. Davis, leader of the American delegation, 
| clearly indicated that these powers were determined 
~ merely to urge “upon Japan and China that they 
tesort to peaceful processes” to secure Sino-Japanese 
fohn F.| COOperation ‘‘on a basis that is fair to each and ac- 
| ceptable to both.” China and the U.S.S.R., the sec- 
we ond group, called upon all peace-loving powers to 
take firm steps against this episode of aggression 
in order to discourage similar incidents in future. 
National} Finally Italy, represented only by a subordinate offi- 
uss matter 


cial who upheld the German and Japanese point of 
view, politely deprecated the prospects for success 





of the conference or of coercive measures against 
Japan, and proposed that it disband after inviting 
the warring parties to negotiate between themselves. 
The sorry impotence of the conference was thrown 
into sharper relief by reports that Britain and France 
—in return for American reluctance to make com- 
mitments for cooperative anti-Fascist measures in 
Europe—would steer clear of effective collective 
steps in the Pacific. 


Despite vehement denials from both Chinese and 
Japanese sources that the two countries have agreed 
to German mediation, it is scarcely conceivable that 
Hitler would have permitted his offer to become 
public unless he had received some covert support 
from both quarters. According to one plausible re- 
port the German Chancellor, taking advantage of a 
discreet Japanese inquiry with regard to the avail- 
ability of Nazi good offices at the proper moment, 
approached a Chinese spokesman in Berlin and re- 
ceived an encouraging response. Nazi officials un- 
doubtedly jumped at the opportunity to score a 
coup by snatching the diplomatic initiative away 
from the proponents of the conference method of 
settling disputes. 

The formulation of peace terms acceptable to 
both China and Japan, however, remains an un- 
solved conundrum for both the Brussels conference 
and the Nazis. There seems to be little doubt that 
both nations, now experiencing the darker side of 
martial adventure, are gradually becoming weary of 
the conflict. Tokyo’s grim preoccupation with a 
struggle apparently destined to continue for months 
was signalized by the establishment on November 2 
of an Imperial general headquarters to prosecute 
the war under unified command—a measure which 
may result in tightening autocratic military control 
over the civil life of the Empire as well. The constant 
threat of hostilities with the Soviet Union has neces- 








r= —— ai 








— 
— 











sitated the dispatch of perhaps 300,000 men to the 
northern Manchoukuo border, where fighting is 
easiest on frozen winter terrain. Japanese successes 
in flanking operations at Shanghai and rapid ad- 
vances in Shansi merely open a vista of mote re- 
mote Chinese defense lines and increasingly severe 
guerrilla warfare. Appropriations for war purposes 
already surpass those of the Russo-Japanese conflict. 
On the Chinese side, officials must realize that even 
their dim hope for the collapse of the Japanese cam- 
paign involves a long period of economic strangu- 
lation and warfare on highly unfavorable terms. 

Nevertheless, Japan and China are still poles 
apart with respect to mutually acceptable peace 
terms. In a statement made on November 7, Chiang 
Kai-shek refused to open direct negotiations with 
Japan under any conditions save, presumably, restora- 
tion of the status guo ante. Japan's war aims, on the 
other hand, are known to comprise the establish- 
ment of a thinly veiled Japanese protectorate in 
North China and substitution of an “anti-communist’’ 
régime for the Nanking government. To the Chinese, 
who receive active support from native com- 
munists and an unknown degree of assistance from 
the U.S.S.R., the latter stipulation can only signify 
complete subservience to Tokyo in national affairs. 
Regarding the anti-communist crusade as a mere 
cloak for imperialist aims, Nanking can scarcely 
look upon Hitler as an impartial mediator or wel- 
come his intervention in the dispute. But if the 
Western democracies fail to attack the problem in a 
new and less pusillanimous spirit, China may ulti- 
mately have no recourse but to submit. 


Davip H. Popper 


ROME-BERLIN AXIS SWINGS EAST 


‘The signing on November 6 of the Rome protocol 
by which Italy—with little show of enthusiasm— 
associated itself with the German-Japanese pact 
against communism, indicates the extent to which 
the Rome-Berlin axis has swung east during the past 
year. The anti-communist pact, which other countries 
are invited to join, involves an undertaking to com- 
bat at home and abroad the activities of their “com- 
mon enemy’—the Communist International—as dis- 
tinguished from the Soviet government with which 
the three dictatorships remain officially on speaking 
terms. Since communist movements in Germany, 
Italy and Japan have been ruthlessly suppressed, the 
principal value of the pact is that it may be used 
to justify interference in any development abroad 
which, in the opinion of the Fascist dictators, re- 
veals the slightest connection with communism. 

By obtaining Italy’s signature to the Rome proto- 
col, Hitler has enlarged the scope and striking 

wer of his crusade against communism which, 
with the stubborn conviction of a mystic, he sin- 


Page Two —_ 











— 


cerely regards as a threat to European civilization, 
The potentialities of the anti-communist front are 
already indicated by Italo-German support of Franco | 
against the alleged communist menace in Spain; 

German threats of interference in Czechoslovakia, 
whose pact of mutual assistance with the USSR |" 
is denounced as a communist thrust at the heart of 
Central Europe; the danger that Germany, once it 
has gained a foothold in China through collabora-} 
tion with Japan, may attempt to strike at the Soviet | pry 
Union from both east and west; and Fascist propa- 
ganda in the Moslem world and in Latin America, 
where the Red peril has been used as the Scapegoat | adh 
for economic and social maladjustments. Most im- 


. . licly 
portant of all, Hitler’s anti-communist campaign is muc 
also directed at the Western democracies which. ip 


his opinion, are a breeding-ground for communism 

Hitler's fear of communist doctrine does not seem } ir is 
to be entirely shared by Mussolini who, with true | Fro 
Italian realism, has until now found it possible to eigi 
muzzle communism at home while remaining on | oste 
friendly terms with the Soviet Union. So far as Spain | ing 
is concerned, the communist bogey merely serves | fact 
as a convenient pretext for a policy of expansion in | liev 
the Mediterranean which had always formed part | neg 
of Mussolini’s imperial dream. Nor does Italy cher- | be. 
ish any particular sympathy for Japan, denounced | gre: 
only two years ago as a threat to its commercial | or | 
interests in Ethiopia. Faced with the necessity of re-} | 
paying Germany for its diplomatic support on Spain, gre 
Italy found that its most quickly realizable assets | fry 
were acquiescence in the activities of Austrian Nazis, | Un 
support of Germany's colonial demands, and ad-| Mr 
herence to the anti-communist pact. From I/ Duce’s | An 
point of view, the Rome protocol is valuable less as | yep 
a thrust at communism than as an instrument of | boy 
revenge against Britain, whose failure to recognize | the 
the Ethiopian conquest has offended Italy and | the 
handicapped it in obtaining financial assistance } “in 
abroad for the exploitation of its new nial | blo 
empire. Tl 





Believing that, in spite of outward effusions, the | 4 ¢ 
Rome-Berlin axis is only a marriage of convenience, | 201 
Britain still hopes to break it up by a separate deal | 
with Italy. It is significant that, while Mr. Eden on | me 
November 1 made some caustic remarks about Italy's | she 
eagerness to satisfy Hitler's colonia! claims at the | Cor 
expense of other powers, Mr. Chamberlain persists | the 
in his search for a workable Anglo-Italian formula. be 
Meanwhile, Britain has arranged for an exchange of | 
commercial agents with the Spanish Rebels, al-| the 
though still withholding de jure recognition of} sez 
the Franco régime. This decision — regarded in} off 
Paris as a betrayal of the Loyalists— is due to} bil 
the desire of British industrialists and merchants} in 
to safeguard their interests in the Rio Tinto cop-} Eu 


(Continued on Page 4) to 


e 


, 








, the 
ence, 
deal 
n on 
taly's 
t the 
rSists 
nula. 
ge of 
al- 
n of 


ie to 
hants 


cop- 








Washington News Letter 


, aa 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Nov. 8—Developments of the past week at 
Brussels, Rome, Berlin and other focal points of 
world conflict have served to make Washington 
even more acutely conscious of the difficulties of 
adhering to its middle-of-the-road diplomacy. Pub- 
licly, State Department officials profess to be not 
much surprised by such events as Hitler's mediation 
feeler and the Rome protocol linking Italy to the 
German-Japanese anti-communist pact. Both moves, 
t is noted, have been “‘in the cards” for some time. 
From the beginning of the Far Eastern conflict, for- 
eign diplomats have been observing Germany’s 
ostentatious neutrality in the belief that it was lead- 
ing to some such offer of mediation by Hitler. In 
fact, if the offer should materialize, and if it re- 
lieved the Brussels powers of the onerous task of 
negotiating another Hoare-Laval deal, it might not 
be entirely unwelcome—provided it did not do too 
great violence to the theoretical integrity of China 
or the established interests of the Western nations. 

Beneath the surface, however, there is evidence of 
great discomfiture and deep concern. The discom- 
fiture arises from the efforts at Brussels to push the 
United States into the position of leadership which 
Mr. Roosevelt's Chicago speech seemed to promise. 
Anthony Eden’s House of Commons speech on No- 
vember 1, declaring he would travel from ‘“Mel- 
bourne to Alaska” to get the “full cooperation” of 
the United States, was distinctly not helpful from 
the Washington view. And published reports of the 
inner conference’ working toward a democratic 
bloc has required rather elaborate explanation here. 

e dilethama is now painfully acute. Having issued 
a clarion call for concerted action, and having de- 
nounced Japan as a treaty breaker, it is not easy to 
turn around with a milk and water proposal for 
mediation which Tokyo is bound to reject. If Tokyo 
should now formally declare war on China, thus 
compelling invocation of the Neutrality Act, which 
the Administration has ignored, the dilemma would 
be complete. 


The concern arises more from the ultimate than 
the immediate effects of the anti-communist pact 
sealed at Rome. Looking ahead, State Department 
officials fear that Britain and France may be immo- 
bilized in Europe, with the threat of Italian action 
in the Mediterranean and German action in Central 
Europe preventing any effective democratic coopera- 
tion in the Far East. Nearer home, there is growing 


apprehension that the anti-communist front may at- 
tempt to line up the semi-dictatorial South American 
States or, in the event of civil war, actually to in- 
tervene as they have in the case of Spain. Most 
concerned are those responsible Washington officials 
who have been striving to stave off the alignment of 
the world into ideological blocs, which sooner or 
later must come into conflict. The task of preventing 
such a rigid alignment has been made much more 
difficult by the week’s developments. 


Storm clouds in the West Indies. The mysterious 
rumors of Haitian-Dominican friction, current here 
for some time, were finally confirmed last week by 
Georges Leger, Haitian Foreign Minister, now in 
this country. The serious situation now revealed ex- 
plains the efforts of the State Department to sup- 
press news of the initial clash a month ago. Troops 
are reported massed along the frontier of the two 
states. Beginning on October 3, it is declared, mem- 
bers of the Dominican army rounded up Haitian 
workers and peasants in the northwestern part of 
the Dominican Republic, and massacred them in cold 
blood. The assaults were continued for three days 
and cost the lives of at least 1000 Haitian civilians, 
including women and children. A mixed Haitian- 
Dominican commission is reported to be investigat- 
ing the affair. 

Public opinion in Haiti, it is said, is highly in- 
flamed against the Haitian authorities for attempt- 
ing to hush up the scandal, as well as against the 
neighboring government and the Dominicans resi- 
dent in Haiti. Apprehension that publicity might 
provoke riots in Haiti was apparently behind the 
attempt of the State Department and the Haitian 
government to keep the matter out of the press. It 
has also been feared that the danger of hostilities 
between the two states might upset the continental 
concord fostered by the Good Neighbor policy. 

The Trujillo dictatorship in the Dominican Re- 
public has frequently been charged with oppressive 
cruelty against its own citizens. But it is not yet clear 
to what degree that régime is responsible for insti- 
gating the massacre. For a century relations be- 
tween the two countries have been subjected to 
recurrent strain. At present Haiti, with twice the 
population of the Dominican Republic, possesses 
only half the territory; so that population pressure, 
aided by the demand of the Dominican sugar indus- 
try for cheap labor, has promoted a constant seepage 
of Haitians into the neighboring country where 
many have squatted on Dominican land. Although 








” 














the long-standing boundary dispute between the two 
states was finally settled in February 1935, cattle 
raids by Haitians across the border have caused re- 
newed friction. The Trujillo dictatorship has also 
been reported as irritated by the presence in Haiti 
of Dominican political exiles. 

Henry Norweb, United States Minister to the 
Dominican Republic, who has been in Havana as 
a delegate to the Inter-American Radio Conference, 
was ordered to return to his post. Despite the seri- 
ous concern of officials here, there are no indica- 
tions yet that Washington will step into the dispute 
by proposing the extension of good offices or that the 








Page Four O 





American powers will seek to establish a commission aha 


of investigation to ascertain the actual facts and 
responsibility. 





ROME-BERLIN AXIS SWINGS EAST 
(Continued from Page 2) 
per mines, the Jerez sherry trade, and Spanish 
iron ore, urgently needed for British rearmament. 
Britain’s talent for reconciling its economic inter. 
ests with its reluctance to wage war should encouy.| 7 
age the Fascist dictators in their plans for expansion} Som 
in Eastern Europe, the Mediterranean and the Far} low: 











The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


Assignment in Utopia, by Eugene Lyons. New York, 
Harcourt, Brace, 1937. $3.50 


A six-year sojourn in the U.S.S.R. converts a journalist 
of Communist sympathies into a foe of all dictatorships. 
Although too voluminous, this book is a forceful state- 
ment of the worth and meaning of liberalism to both the 
intelligentsia and the masses. 


When China Unites, by Harry Gannes. New York, Knopf, 
1937. $2.50 


This loosely written account of recent Chinese history 


from the pure Stalinist point of view contains interesting 
data on Chinese communism. 


Landlord and Peasant in China, by Chen Han-seng. New 
York, International Publishers, 1936. $2.00 


A striking analysis of the agrarian crisis in south 
China, utilizing first-hand scientific data on land distribu- 
tion, tenancy, landlordism, rents, land prices, taxes, 
credits and wages. 


And Then the Storm, by Sister M. Monica. New York, 
Longmans, Green, 1937. $2.50 
A scholarly American nun, now a Franco sympathizer, 
recounts with charm her experiences in Spanish travel 
and research prior to the outbreak of the civil war. 


Monetary Review. Geneva, League of Nations, 1937. Dis- 
tributed by Columbia University Press, New York. $1.50 


This survey is indispensable to any one interested in 
recent monetary developments. It traces the progressive 
depreciation of currencies during the depression and con- 
tains illuminating sections on forward exchange, the op- 
eration of equalization funds, gold reserves and interest 
rates. 


Final Report of the Mixed Committee of the League of 
Nations on the Relation of Nutrition to Health, Agri- 
culture and Economic Policy. Geneva, League of Na- 
tions, 1937. Distributed by Columbia University Press, 
New York. $2.00 


This excellent report, which deserves wide attention, 
contains a wealth of data on essentials of a good diet and 
trends in food consumption as affected by prices, size and 
distribution of national income, education and other fac- 
tors. It shows that an astonishingly large number of 
people throughout the world are still suffering from un- 
dernourishment and malnutrition, and outlines some solu- 
tions for these deficiencies. 


proh 
East. VERA MICHELES DEAN | neut 
sever 
Novem 
Portrait of Mexico, by Diego Rivera and Bertram DPD, 
Wolfe. New York, Covici-Friede, 1937. $4.75 


A collection of 249 half-tones reproducing Rivera’s most | 
significant murals and paintings, accompanied by Wolfe’s N 
penetrating interpretation of Mexico’s history. 


Report on International Trade. London, P E P, 1987, dissol 
8s. 6d. 

Report on the British Social Services. London, P E Pp, {PO 
1987. 7s. 6d. tures. 
Two suggestive studies of importance, prepared by the ight 

Political and Economic Planning group of London. imu! 


Supplement to the Law and Procedure of International este 
Tribunals, by Jackson H. Ralston. Palo Alto, Stanford 





University Press, 1936. $4.00 WI 
This volume brings up to date Mr. Ralston’s standard jlishm 
work, the last edition of which was published in 1926. al 


The Career of Théophile Delcassé, by Charles W. Porter. }in La 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1936 


$3.50 se 
Scholarly biography of the man who built the Triple os 
Entente and helped to prepare the World War. aSCs: 


The Settlement of Canadian-American Disputes, by P. E. that t 
Corbett. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1937. $2.50 fof the 


This study of the long series of Canadian-American Ms its 
arbitration proceedings concludes with the recommenda-f} ‘atic 
tion that a general arbitration treaty providing for 4 ipl 
permanent tribunal be negotiated by the two states. ciple 


International Control in the Non-Ferrous Metals, by W. “ap 
Y. Elliott, E. S. May, J. W. F. Rowe, Alex Skelton and 4s} 
Donald Wallace. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $6.50 the n 


This excellent and monumental survey of various inter- ploye 
national restriction and control schemes fulfils a long-felt f. er 
need. ? 
Eyes on Japan, by Victor A. Yakhontoff. New York, Cow- he 

ard-McCann, 1936. $3.50 Iam 

A useful general survey of Japan’s historical and cul- rapl 


tural backgrounds and current social, economic, political Th 
and international questions. 








ion 
Technology, Corporations and the General Welfare, by entr: 
Henry Wallace. Chapel Hill, N. C€., University of 
North Carolina Press, 1937. $1.00 eC 
An acute analysis of the rigidities in capitalism caused g[ess 
by modern financial and economic organization. hitia 















Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonn Lasiig Bueit, President; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor. Entered as second-class mattef 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


Tess 
FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 3, Novamesr 12, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National Bhi e 





our 
olvii 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





