






ign 
ire- 
‘ive 
vill 
ely 
ad. 
ler- 
rity 
all 
ore 
the 
| of 


nan 


ong 
Ow- 
hey 
irge 
t of 


eed 
eco- 
tra- 
lave 
> of 
lief, 
ains 
art- 
livi- 
eco- 
ec- 
efa- 
ility 
For- 
t of 
and 
e to 
are 
ives 
hem 





in OE LRN 


ui 
mw 


Entered as 2nd class matter 








FOREIGN -POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vor. XXIV, No. 9 


DECEMBER 15, 1944 





GREAT POWERS MUST AGREE ON AIMS OF INTERVENTION IN EUROPE 


T would be the ultimate tragedy of a tragic half- 
century if to the devastation and suffering of two 
wars should now be added in Europe the horrors of 
civil strife, and conflict among the United Nations 
concerning the use to be made of military victory 
over Germany. The only hope Germany has of es- 
caping defeat is disunity in the mighty coalition 
ranged along its borders. Can the Allies effectively 
dash this hope ? 

When Secretary of State Stettinius, in his declara- 
tion of December 5, said that the United States ex- 
pected the Italian people, and “to an even more pro- 
nounced degree’ the governments of the United Na- 
tions in liberated territories, ‘to work out their prob- 
lems of government along democratic lines without 
influence from outside,” he brought out into the open 
one of the most burning issues of this war. Blunt as 
his words seemed to the British, in the long run more 
good than harm will be done if questions about the 
future of Europe, which is of life and death con- 
cern not only to the liberated peoples but also to their 
liberators, are threshed out frankly. 


WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR DISORDER ? The 
discussion now raging on both sides of the ocean, 
however, would be greatly clarified if the statesmen 
and editorial writers of the United Nations could 
agree on definitions of such words as “democracy,” 
“communism,” and “order.’’ Mr. Churchill, in his ad- 
dress to the House of Commons on December 8 

offered a rough and ready definition of democracy as 

‘fight first, vote after.” The British Prime Minister 
has proved himself a great and eloquent historian 
but he is perhaps better equipped to assess the his- 

ry of the British people, with their unusually for- 
tunate tradition of centuries of constitutional mon- 
archy, than that of other, less fortunate nations. Vic- 
tor Emmanuel III and his son, Prince Humbert, both 
of whom accepted Fascism, or King George of 
Greece, who supported the Rightist régime of Pre- 


mier Metaxas, cannot in all fairness be compared to 
British monarchs of modern times. Nor is it histor- 
ically accurate that disorder and disunion in Europe 
can be traced exclusively to Leftist elements. The 
ferment at work in Belgium, in Italy, in Greece, is 
due to many causes other than Communist influence. 
No responsible person acquainted with Europe be- 
tween the two wars could believe for a moment that 
the liberated peoples would unquestionably welcome 
back individuals or institutions they blamed, rightly 
or wrongly, for their defeat and the sufferings they 
had endured under Nazi rule. And no one familiar 
with human nature could assume that men and 
women driven to the point of sheer desperation by 
hunger, misery and disease would peacefully settle 
down to wait for orderly elections while, before their 
very eyes, the régimes they had opposed almost as 
much as they had opposed the Nazis returned to 
power, however temporarily, under Allied protection. 

The British government does present a strong 
argument when it insists that it intervened in Bel- 
gium, Italy and Greece not to oppose Leftist ele- 
ments, but to maintain order. All of us here, as we 
watch mounting Allied losses with deep anxiety, 
favor any measure the military authorities regard as 
essential for the protection of the lives and supply 
lines of Allied troops. But what is meant by “order” ? 
Might not order be more readily restored by pro- 
visional governments that command the confidence 
of liberated peoples than by exiled governments 
which do have the asset of legitimacy but have fallen 
into disfavor in their homelands? The example of 
France, where the government of General de Gaulle 

the only one so far in liberated territories free of 
any ties to pre-1939 régimes—has succeeded in main- 
taining relative order and speeding reconstruction, is 
not without significance in this respect. 


BRITAIN’S STRATEGIC STAKE. Actually, the 
British may be primarily concerned with maintaining 























in power governments that might be expected to 
grant Britain strategic bases or other advantages. 
This is an entirely natural concern on the part of the 
British at this stage of the war—just as natural as 
Russia's demand, on strategic grounds, for Eastern 
Poland, the Baltic states, and bases in Finland. From 
the American point of view it is disheartening that 
Europe seems breaking up once more along the lines 
of old-time alliances—with Britain trying to acquire 
spheres of influence in the Low Countries, in Italy 
and Greece; Russia in Eastern Europe; while France 
and Britain both seek reinsurance against post-war 
Germany by alliances and pacts of mutual aid with 
Russia. The United States, however, is not in a strong 
position to criticize either Britain or Russia on this 
score until it can assure both powers, and all the 
other United Nations, that we shall unequivocally 
help them achieve security against German resurgence. 

The British, moreover, can argue that they are by 
no means the only ones to intervene in the internal 
affairs of other nations. The United States has ad- 
vised Chiang Kai-shek to reach an agreement with 
the Communists, and has used diplomatic and eco- 
nomic measures to induce a change of government in 
Argentina. Russia, too, has declared that it seeks 
“friendly” governments in countries along its west- 
ern borders, as well as in Iran, and has openly inter- 
vened in Poland. 

INTERVENTION FOR WHAT? When this con- 
tention is advanced, critics of Britain tend to say: 
“Ah, but the United States [or Russia}, is supporting 
the ‘right’ people.” The matter of who are the “right” 
people is obviously a matter of subjective judement. 
What can be said with some assurance is that, so 
far as one can see, Russia is swimming with the tide 
of events in Europe, while Britain is swimming 
against it in some areas where it happens to have 
special strategic interests. The crux of the matter, 
however, is that none of the three great powers who, 
under the Dumbarton Oaks proposals would have 
primary responsibility for international security, 
really favors a complete hands-off policy—and none 
of them can do so as long as the world lives in 
its present state of anarchy. The United States does 


Page Two =— — 











—— 





not, in fact, favor a policy of nonintervention. We 
do intervene, when we think it is to our interest— 
although nowhere have we gone as far as the British 
have in Greece. Our policy would be clearer if the 
American government would implement Mr. Hull's 
declaration of April 9, in which he said this country 
supports everywhere forces favorable to democracy. 
This would still call for a definition of democracy— 
because in our sense of the word neither Chiang 
Kai-shek, nor the Chinese Communists, nor Russia, 
come under the heading of democracy, and we may 
soon be faced with the question whether the methods 
by which the Polish Committee of Liberation or 
Marshal Tito’s régime achieved power were demo- 
cratic. In the final analysis, when we say we support 
forces that favor democracy, we really mean forces 
that favor the United States as against Germany and 
Japan. Moreover, without intervention by the United 
States in the form at least of relief, it is entirely pos- 
sible that such forces may not be able to achieve the 
democratic goals urged by Mr. Stettinius. 

If it were possible to take a Gallup poll of Amer- 
ican opinion on this subject, it probably would be dis- 
covered that an overwhelming majority of our people 
favor the establishment, outside our borders, of insti- 
tutions similar to our own, and oppose the use of 
American forces to restore governments that appear 
to us as reactionary, and most of all to bolster up 
monarchies. But, as the experience of this war has 
demonstrated, it is not enough for us and the Brit- 
ish to declare that we favor democracy or sympathize 
with it if we either refuse to support it where it tries 
to get a toe-hold, or even occasionally support its 
enemies. Only by defining our objectvies about the 
future of Europe can we hope to find a real basis for 
agreement, eventually, with Britain and Russia. If 
Russia—as Mr. Churchill seems to fear—should gain 
influence in European areas of strategic importance 
to Britain, this will be due not to the peculiar 
virtues or the superior Machiavellianism of the 
Russians, but because Britain and the United States 
will have allowed the cause of democracy to be de- 
feated by default. 

VERA MICHELES DEAN 


LATIN AMERICANS HOPE FOR OVERHAULING OF HEMISPHERE POLICIES 


As the threat of war in this hemisphere disappears, 
the United States faces the loss of its moral and 
political leadership in Latin America. Looking ahead 
into the post-war world, many Latin Americans fear 
that unless the system of regular, frequent inter- 
American consultations is revived and expanded, the 
whole facade of continental unity will swiftly col- 
lapse. If this happens, they hold that Washington 
will be to blame because of its inconsistent support 
of some Latin American dictatorships and censure 
of others; and, above all, because of its apparent be- 
lief that informing its American partner-states on 


policies of vital importance to them all is equivalent 
to consulting with them. As the spokesman for the 
Good Neighbor Policy and the most powerful part- 
ner in the regional Pan-American enterprise, the 
United States must assume initiative in promptly call- 
ing an inter-American conference to settle the grave 
problems accompanying the transition to peace. 
ARGENTINA—FOCUS OF TROUBLE. Argen- 
tina is the cancer in the hemisphere body. The threat 
of European Fascism may well spread from Buenos 
Aires to other Latin American countries. It is from 
Argentina that military coups attempted elsewhere, 























~ 


= 


ent 
the 
irt- 
the 
all- 


ave 


- 


# 


— 











with or without the connivance ofjtke Farrell-Per6n 
overnment, have derived inspiration. Until Argen- 
tina again becomes a democratic mémber of the Pan- 
American group, hemisphere reper wil! |} mot im- 
prove. Many Latin Americans believe that until now 
the United States action against Argentina has been 
purely unilateral and—what is worse—ineffectual. 
While fundamentally they may not approve the prac- 
tices of the Buenos Aires military clique, they have 

latent fear that the United States may revert to 
“Big Stick’’ diplomacy; and this fear leads them to 
applaud Argentina's successful resistance to pressure 
from the United States. 

Moreover, Latin Americans, noting the cordial re- 
lations between Brazil and the United States, are 
unable to explain to themselves why this nation can 
tolerate in one country the type of régime it attacks 
in another. Herein may lie one reason for their delay 
in reaching an agreement on Argentina’s request for 
a conference to consider its case. Latin American 
chancelleries are fearful that if they decide on strong 
action of an economic or even military nature against 
the Farrell-Perén government, they will be establish- 
ing a precedent which some day may be used against 
their own countries. For, they ask frankly, how many 
of our Latin American governments are truly demo- 
cratic? Washington’s complaint against Argentina 
has been its failure to fulfill the Rio de Janeiro 
pledges of 1942 to break off diplomatic relations and 
ver commercial and financial contacts with the 

but Argentina has in their opinion, however 
al ingly ind tardily, complied with them all. But 
a United States charge goes deeper, and concerns 
he constitution: lity of the Buenos Aires ré gime, 
ight it not be directed as well at Brazil, Paraguay, 
Be olivia and other governments which do not have a 
opular mandate? In any case, a considerable num- 
ber of Latin Americans, whatever their feeling on the 
subject of Argentina, think that United States policy 
toward that country partakes too much of “interven- 
tionism’”’ to be reassuring. 

RUSSIA—POSSIBLE COUNTERPOISE. To pro- 

tect themselves against possible imperialistic tenden- 


Page Three 





JUST PUBLISHED— 


ITALY’S STRUGGLE FOR RECOVERY—An 
Allied Dilemma by C. Grove Haines 


25c 


December 1 issue of ForEIGN Poticy REPORTS 
REporTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 


Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















cies on the part of the United States, the countries to 
the south may undertake in the post-war period to 
play the great powers against each other and so pre- 
vent any one of them from attaining pre-eminence 
in Latin America. It is no secret there that Britain 
and the United States have been unable to agree on 
their Argentine policy—and that their failure to do 
so is closely related to their respective trade aims in 
South America. The Buenos Aires government has 
been sedulously fomenting this division between its 
two greatest wartime purchasers. According to close 
observers of the Latin American scene, the country 
which stands to gain most from the divisions, both 
internal and external, that beset the continent is Rus- 
sia. Diplomatic relations with Russia have been re- 
sumed by Cuba, Colombia, Uruguay, Mexico, Costa 
Rica and Chile; and even Brazil may shortly ex- 
tend recognition. There is a certain feeling of affinity 
with Russia on the part of articulate elements of the 
great underprivileged mass of Latin Americans who 
feel the conditions under which they live approximate 
those in Russia in 1917, and that Russia may hold 
the secret of deliverance for them. Moreover, busi- 
nessmen are also looking to Russia, as the only con- 
siderable market for Latin American raw materials 
outside of Britain and possibly the United States. 


WHAT PRICE THE GOOD NEIGHBOR? If 
hemisphere relations are at their lowest ebb in a 
decade, they are by no means beyond improvement. 
The prospect of peace was bound to usher in a difh- 
cult period of readjustment, as North and Latin 
Americans again become aware of the vast psycholog- 
ical and cultural differences that separate them. They 
must now evaluate the measures concerted at the 
successive inter-American conferences to decide which 
of these were improvisations to combat the war emer- 
gency and which were a truly genuine prelude to con- 
tinued collaboration. Following the recent reorgan- 
ization of the State Department, Latin Americans 
look with new hope to a thorough overhauling of 
hemisphere policies. In an interview granted a Latin 
American press representative shortly before he be- 
came Secretary of State, Mr. Stettinius explicitly 
stated that a conference of American Foreign Min- 
isters would be held prior to the United Nations con- 
ference on Dumbarton Oaks. Latin America needs the 
economic assistance of the United States—but on 
terms determined in a spirit of collaboration by all 
the American states. 


OutveE HoLMEs 


(The last in a series of articles on post-war Latin America.) 





REIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. 


XXIV, No. 9, DecemBer 15, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy 


Association, Incorporated. Nationa! 


feadquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lent, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dgan, Editor. Entered as 


econd-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three 


= month for chance of address on membership publications. 


Dollars a Year. Please allow at leas 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


ze 181 Pr 


oduced under union conditions and combosed and printed by union lahoew 





Washington News beter 














AIR FREEDOMS CHARTED AT CHfC@AGO-€ONFERENCE 


The international air conference at Chicago 
adjourned on December 7, after the delegates had 
concluded an agreement establishing an interim ad- 
visory council to deal with air transport in the post- 
war period. They also drafted a series of documents 
which will go far toward insuring freedom of aerial 
navigation once 26 of the signatory governments 
have formally ratified them. Although the Soviet 
Union declined to attend the conference, a seat on 
the projected Interim Council of the Provisional Civil 
Aviation Organization has been reserved for that 
country. Apparently the Soviet government objects to 
the principle of freedom of innocent passage, which 
would permit foreign planes on regularly scheduled 
transport routes to fly over the territory of any coun- 
try without specific negotiations between the interest- 
ed governments. It was this problem of security 
which caused negotiators of the Paris (1919) and 
Havana (1928) air conventions to include in them 
the principle of the ‘closed sky,” requiring country- 
to-country negotiation for passage of foreign planes 
over the territory of any nation. 

ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF CONFERENCE. 
Freedom of innocent passage is provided in one of 
the four documents signed at Chicago, which togeth- 
er mark a long step forward in international agree- 
ment and in the removal of barriers to easy move- 
ment of aerial communication among the various 
countries. The major document is an international 
aerial convention, which would create an Interna- 
tional Civil Aviation Organization to guide, but not 
control, air commerce. In addition, an interim agree- 
ment will govern international air communication 
until the close of the war. Another statement, known 
as the “two freedoms’ document, guarantees the 
freedom of innocent passage and grants to the planes 
of all nations freedom to land in foreign countries for 
non-trafic purposes. A “fifth freedom’ document 
would permit planes to pick up passengers and 
freight in a foreign land. The British object to this 
last “freedom,” but there is good prospect that the 
other principles of the Chicago conference will win 
international acceptance. 

So far as the United States is concerned, one im- 
portant effect of the agreements is to strengthen the 
position of the State Department, which wants inter- 
national air arrangements to be made a subject of 
gzovernment-to-government agreement. In the past, 
private companies, like Pan-American Airways, had 


FOR VICTORY ° 


negotiated directly with forgign governments. For ex- 
ample, Adolf A. Berle, Jr., Chief of the United States 
delegation at Chicago and retiring Assistant Secre- 
tary of State, testified before the House Committee 
of Merchant Marine and Fisheries on September 12 
that Pan American had made contracts with Dutch 
Guiana, Jamaica, Portugal and Trinidad that exclud- 
ed entrance into those countries of any other United 
States air line. Pan-American also agreed with Brazil, 
Argentina, New Zealand and the Belgian Congo that 
one airline in each of those areas should enjoy re- 
ciprocal flying privileges i in the United States. These 
exclusive and reciprocal agreements concluded by 
private American air lines have presented diplomatic 
problems for the United States. Brazil, desirous of 
running an airline to Dutch Guiana, sought clarifica- 
tion from the State Department when it found that 
the Pan-American contract blocked the entrance of 
any other line into that colony. Our government was 
also disturbed by the fact that a private American 
corporation had undertaken to seek special privileges 
in the United States for a foreign country. 

BRITISH CONCERN OVER AVIATION. Eco- 
nomic rather than political disagreements dragged 
out negotiations at Chicago beyond the four weeks it 
was originally thought the conference would run. 
Britain opposed “fifth freedom” landings except for 
debarkation, refueling and emergency purposes, and 
sought to include in the major agreement a clause 
comparable to paragraph four of the convention pro- 
posed in the British international air transport White 
Paper of October 8. This paragraph would have pro- 
vided for “the elimination of uneconomic competi- 
tion by the determination of frequencies [total ser 
vices of all countries operating on any international 
route}, the distribution of those frequencies between 
the countries concerned, and the fixing of rates of 
carriage in relation to standards of speed and accom- 
modation.”” The United States, however, opposed any 
restriction of competition. Behind the British point of 
view lay apprehension that the United States, pos- 
sessing more transport planes and operating more 
transport routes than any other country, might gain 
undue advantage in the international air transport 
field immediately after the war. However, the first 
steps have been taken to link all the countries in 
agreement on certain aspects of aerial commerce, and 
points which are still in dispute may be resolved on 
the basis of this understanding. Brain BOLLEs 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 














' 








