S 


) register 
1aVE Sup. 
»me who 
e future. 
measures 


gap be. 
$ mo cer: 
For the 
esident's 
> United 
ict. Nor 
at meas 
Juropean 
of both 
ecent ex 
e Anglo- 


own this 

Foreign 
>port for 
ct, which 
precisely 
o Britain 
is sought 
1 suspect 
d Ameti- 
at his ef- 
1 will be 
the post- 
destined 
o-French 
torships. 


STONE 


ia 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 
GN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
; om on AFB West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
ABR 
A Sot 


(hot <VIII, No. 29 


EUROPE IN RETREAT 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


$2.00 


“Mrs. Dean not only possesses extraordinary resources 
in the way of information, with the ability to present 
them succinctly and clearly, but she has written the cool- 
est book of a hysterical period.” —The Christian Century. 


May 12, 1939 


FPA members ordering through Headquarters receive a 10% discount. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


General Library 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Nichican 


— 


POLISH STAND HASTENS EUROPEAN REALIGNMENTS 


bm announcement in Milan on May 7 that 
Germany and Italy were planning to transform 
their anti-Comintern pact of 1936 into a military and 
political alliance constituted Hitler's answer to the 
statement of Foreign Minister Beck in the Polish 
Sejm on May 5. In his restrained but firmly worded 
speech Colonel Beck, who had done everything in 
his power to foster Polish-German collaboration, de- 
clared that the non-aggression pact of 1934 had 
never been intended to prevent either Poland or 
Germany from concluding agreements with other 
countries. The Anglo-Polish pledge of mutual as- 
sistance could not, therefore—as claimed by Hitler 
on April 28—be regarded as a violation of the 1934 
pact, especially since Germany had meanwhile en- 
tered into an arrangement with Italy. The Polish 
memorandum delivered to Germany on May 5 stated 
that, immediately after the seizure of Bohemia and 
Moravia in March, Hitler had presented peremptory 
demands for the surrender of Danzig and the right 
to construct a railway and an automobile road 
through the Polish Corridor (Pomorze). In return, 
he had hinted at concessions affecting Slovakia and 
possibly a share of French and British colonies in 
Africa. When Poland made counter-suggestions, 
Hitler refused to negotiate, and answered the Polish 
proposals by denouncing the 1934 pact. Colonel Beck 
declined to make one-sided concessions with respect 
either to Danzig or the Corridor, but left the door 
open for further negotiations — provided Germany - 
demonstrates both peaceful intentions and peaceful 
methods of action. 


EFFECT OF ITALO-GERMAN ALLIANCE. 
Poland’s resistance to steamroller fulfillment of 
Mein Kampf appears to have hastened the imposi- 
tion of German control on Italy, which had been 
gradually developing since 1936. Italy’s outspoken 


reluctance to wage war on Poland, and the growing 
unpopularity of collaboration between Rome and 
Berlin among Italians, seemed to call for a tightening 
of the axis screws. This objective was not achieved 
until Hitler had sent to Italy his Foreign and Air 
Ministers and his Chief of Staff, who obviously 
brought pressure on Italy to surrender what freedom 
of action it still retained in the diplomatic sphere. 
The Milan conference is expected to be closely fol- 
lowed by the dispatch of additional German tech- 
nicians and army leaders to Italy and Libya, and the 
construction, under German supervision, of fortifica- 
tions along the Franco-Italian frontier. In return for 
what is described by the Nazis as “unlimited” military 
collaboration, Italy is apparently to receive German 
support for its Mediterranean claims against France, 
with which it has hitherto made little headway. 


The purpose of these joint German and Italian 
operations has become increasingly clear since the 
termination of the Spanish civil war. They are in- 
tended to immobilize France, which will have to 
guard itself against possible attack on its German, 
Italian and Spanish frontiers; to divert the attention 
of France and Britain to the Mediterranean and 
Africa, where the combined axis forces constitute a 
threat to either Egypt or Tunisia, or both; and thus 
to prevent the Western powers from undertaking any 
effective action on behalf of Poland, should the Poles 
decide to fight Germany over Danzig. As in the case 
of Czechoslovakia, what must be anticipated in the 
Free City is not a German attack, but a German- 
sponsored attempt by Danzig Nazis to proclaim their 
“self-determination” to return to the Reich. 


In such an eventuality, Poland would have to 
count less on direct military assistance from the 
Western powers than on such aid as it can obtain 
from its neighbors in Eastern Europe. These Ger- 


: TS ee eS 


= 7 aN = 
SS ae, = - 


ad ase 
. a 
SS aS ae - —_ 


Bho pge St SRE PERO RET ae eS get 


- 


Cd 


} 
i 
; 
zs 
‘ 
9 
gat 
te 
4 
. 
: 
i 
¥ 
. 
’ 
_ 


a at 


many is now doing its best to neutralize, by offering 
pacts of non-aggression to the Baltic and Scandi- 
navian countries, and economic assistance to Hungary 
and the Balkans. The unknown factor in the East 
is still the U.S.S.R., which is marking time in its ne- 
gotiations with Britain and France. Britain appar- 
ently wanted the Soviet Union to aid Poland and 
Rumania, at such time and in such manner as these 
two countries might decide; while the Soviet govern- 
ment wanted Britain and France to give it guarantees 
against German attack on the U.S.S.R. as well as 
pledges regarding the Far East. Britain’s hesitation 
to accept a general alliance with the U.S.S.R. is de- 
termined, among other things, by its reluctance to 
antagonize Japan which, it hopes, may still reject an 
outright military pact with the axis powers; its desire 
to avoid friction with anti-Communist Catholic coun- 
tries like Spain and Portugal; its unwillingness to 
alienate the Vatican, which is reported to be urging 
Hitler to negotiate about Danzig; and its fear that, 
when it comes to a showdown, anti-communism 
may prove stronger in Poland and Rumania than 
anti-Nazism. 

WHAT DOES LITVINOV’S REMOVAL 
MEAN? The dilemma of Anglo-Soviet relations was 
not resolved by the resignation—or dismissal—on 
May 3 of Foreign Commissar Litvinov, principal So- 
viet advocate of collective security. While M. Lit- 


FINANCIAL AID STRENGTHENS U.S.-LATIN AMERICAN TIES 


The unremitting efforts of the Roosevelt Admin- 
istration to promote solidarity in the Western Hemi- 
sphere as a bulwark against European “cultural” 
and economic penetration found graphic expression 
in the visit paid to Washington last week by General 
Anastasio Somoza, President of Nicaragua.* 

President Somoza’s visit will be followed by that 
of the Chilean Minister of Finance, who will at- 
tempt to negotiate a loan of at least $50,000,000 in 
this country. The Chilean Congress has already au- 
thorized the government to borrow up to double this 
amount abroad at an interest rate not in excess of 
3 per cent. Since Chile is unable to pay more than a 
small fraction of contractual service on its outstand- 
ing external debt, it is hardly in a position to obtain 
funds through ordinary channels. Relief must there- 
fore be found in Washington rather than Wall 
Street, and there is ample reason to believe that aid 
will be given, although the amount Chile seeks may 
well be whittled down during the course of nego- 
tiations. 

Chile is urgently in need of financial assistance in 
order to carry out its earthquake reconstruction plan. 
In the large foreign loan authorized by the Chilean 
Congress, rehabilitation of the devastated areas was 


*See Washington News Letter. 


Page Two 


— 


vinov’s disappearance had long been predicted, j 
probably indicates that the Soviet government, weary 
of inconclusive negotiations with France and Britain, 
has decided once again to play a lone hand in inter. 
national affairs. If this is true, Stalin and his assog. 
ates—who in contrast to Litvinov and the Old Bol. 
sheviks are distinctly national and on the whole anti. 
Western—may be expected to play their hand jp 
accordance not with ideological concepts, but with 
what they regard as Russia’s national interests, 
Whether national interests will dictate eventual co. 
operation with France and Britain, on Russia’s terms, 
or some kind of non-aggression pact with Germany, 
will probably be revealed at the Soviet Congress on 
May 25, where Litvinov’s successor M. Molotoy— 
one of Stalin’s most loyal collaborators—is expected | 
to speak. Meanwhile, the Soviet government is dis. } 
playing great diplomatic activity in the Black Se 
area, where its envoy, M. Potemkin, who may become 
Foreign Commissar, has just completed a tour of 
Rumania, Bulgaria and Turkey. It is not impossible 
that, as an alternative to collaboration with the West, 
the Soviet Union may attempt to build up an Eastern 
European system of security, stretching from the Bal- 
tic to the Black Sea. In such a program the removal 
of M. Litvinov, who had been regarded with sus- 
picion in Poland and Rumania, may prove to have 


been an important factor. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


linked with an ambitious program of industrial ex- 
pansion, including hydroelectric development as well 
as appropriations for smelters, refining plants and 
other enterprises. This program was part of the 
broad aims of the Popular Front government elected | 
in 1938, but the social and economic objectives of | 
the new administration have been necessarily subor- 
dinated to the immediate task of dealing with the | 
vast problems created by the January 1939 earth- 
quake. Meanwhile, with winter approaching, the | 
construction of temporary buildings to house an esti- | 
mated 700,000 made homeless by the earthquake is | 
being rushed. Despite a considerable increase in rev- | 


enue. gained partly at the expense of foreign investors | 


through new taxes on the copper industry, it is 


evident that the government cannot meet the require: | 


ments of reconstruction from current income. 

Aside from these factors, the United States has 
strong political and commercial reasons for extend- 
ing aid to Chile at this time. In the past few years 


| 


Chile has been an important area of German-Ameti- | 


can rivalry and, since 1934, the Reich has increased 
its participation in total Chilean imports from 10.2 
to almost 26 per cent in 1938. While the share of 
the United States in this market showed only a slight 
drop during the same period (from 28.8 per cent to 


=——— 


slight! 
comp¢ 
ods, t 
have 

necess 
interc 
tende 


dictat 
Boliv 
efs O 
on tl 
impe: 
wing 
Ame: 
fasci: 
porta 
ister 
mont 
the s 
in B 
his f 
The 
in co 
it sh 
dicta 
WV 
at W 
man 
econ 
the 


—_—= 


ted, it 
wi 
Britain, 
1 inter. 
associ. 
ld Bol. 
le anti. 
and in 
it with 
terests, 
ual co. 
; terms, 
rmany, 
ress on 
lotov— 
xpected 
is dis. 
ck Sea 
become 
our of 
ossible 
> West, 
Eastern 
he Bal- 
emoval 
ith sus- 
tO have 


, DEAN 


tial ex- 
as well 
nts and 
of the 
elected 
tives of 
y subor- 
vith the 
) earth- 
ng, the 
an esti- 
juake is 
> in rev- 
nvestors 
y, it is 


require 


ates has 
extend- 
Ww years 
.- Ameri- 
ncreased 
om 10.2 
share of 
a slight 
r cent to 


——— 
—7—7_™ 


slightly less than 28), it is probable that without the 
competition of unorthodox German trading meth- 
ods, the American trade record with Chile would 
have been distinctly more favorable. There is no 
necessary connection between ordinary commercial 
intercourse and any financial aid which might be ex- 
tended to Chile, but such aid might well pave the 
way for development of trade between the two 
countries. 

TOTALITARIANISM IN BOLIVIA. Mean- 
while, recent political developments below the Rio 
Grande have emphasized the fact that Latin Ameri- 
can democracy is neither as widespread nor as im- 
pregnable as it is sometimes believed to be. Bolivia's 
current strong man, Colonel German Busch, has 
adopted totalitarianism as the professed cure for the 
economic and financial ills of his country. The young 
dictator, whose régime had been legalized by the 
Bolivian Congress a year ago, has assumed such pow- 
ers of government as were not already in his hands 
on the ground that the country was threatened by 
impending bankruptcy and political chaos. The Left 
wing and liberal press in the United States and Latin 
America has branded the new Bolivian state as 
fascist. Much stress has also been laid on the im- 
portant part played by Sefior Dionisio Foianini, Min- 
ister of Mines and Petroleum, in bringing about last 
month's changes. In 1937 Sefior Foianini instigated 
the seizure of the Standard Oil Company properties 
in Bolivia, and Busch apparently expects to solve 
his financial problems by revenue from this source. 
The new Busch régime admittedly has many features 
in common with European fascism, but on the whole 
it shows little deviation from the type of military 
dictatorship familiar in Latin America. 

Whatever may have been the political influences 
at work in Bolivia, there is no doubt that Nazi Ger- 
many continues to be occupied with the political and 
economic penetration of Latin America. On May 4 
the Federal prosecuting attorney of Argentina held 


Page Three 


that the local Nazi party activities were unconstitu- 
tional, and stated that protective legislation was re- 
quired. The prosecutor's opinion was handed down 


following five weeks’ investigation of charges that 
the Germans were plotting to annex Patagonia, 


which received wide attention following publication 


of an incriminating document. The authenticity of 
the document was not established, but the court’s in- 


vestigation unearthed sufficient evidence of danger- 


ous activity by the Nazis to warrant counter measures. 


Howarp J. TRUEBLOOD 
F.P.A. CLUB CONTEST AWARDS 


The Association is glad to announce the winners 
of the FPA’s Club Contest, which aroused consider- 
able interest in Headline Books and World Affairs 
Pamphlets. In Kansas, one of the club programs was 
given during Farm and Home Week, before an audi- 
ence of 800 people, while others were broadcast over 
local radio stations. 


1st Prize—$25. Miss Anna Harris, Lakewood, N. J. 
Y.W.C.A. A pageant, “Collective Peace Must 
Triumph,” based on Bricks Without Mortar. 


2nd Prize—$20. Mrs. John K. Ormond, Birming- 
ham, Mich. F.P.A. and Women’s International 
Education Council. A skit based on Made in 
U.S.A. 


3rd Prize—F.P.A. Membership. Miss Alice L. 
Krebbs, Lynchburg, Va. Business and Profes- 
sional Women’s Club. “A Broadcast from Five 
Countries,” based on Church and State. 


Honorable Mention. Mrs. Bert G. Mitchell, Allyn, 
Wash. Federation of Women’s Clubs. A 
pageant, “Women of the Americas,” based on 
The Good Neighbors. 


Honorable Mention. Mrs. T. B. Buckner, Kansas 
City, Mo. American Association of. University 
Women. A skit based on The Good Neighbors. 


THE F.P.A. BOOKSHELF 


Escape to Life, by Erika and Klaus Mann. Boston, Hough- 
ton Mifflin, 1939. $3.50 
How the great army of German creative artists and 
intellectuals who left Germany in 1933 and after have 


fared, and why they have sought and still seek to escape 
from the Nazis. 


No Ease in Zion, by T. R. Feiwel. New York, Knopf, 1939. 
$3.75 
This study of British imperialism, Arab nationalism, and 
—in greater detail—the origins and history of Jewish 
Zionism is one of the most brilliant works on the Holy 
Land which has appeared in recent years. 


He Opened the Door of Japan, by Carl Crow. New York, 
Harper & Brothers, 1939. $3.00 
An excellent biography of Townsend Harris, first resi- 
dent American diplomat in Japan, whose achievements are 


honored by Japanese but largely forgotten by his own 
countrymen. 


British-American Alliance, by E. C. Buehler, ed. (Annual 
Debater’s Help Book, Vol. V). New York, Noble and 
Noble, 1938. $2.00 


A very useful collection of outstanding articles and 


speeches concerning an Anglo-American alliance, with a 
critical bibliography for further reading. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVIII, No. 29, May 12, 1939. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lesiig BuELL, President; DorotHy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera MicHeres Dgan, Editor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Ro. 181 


Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


oe 
; ” 
| 


f 
: 
} 


Tal 


Ak) 1 
oe) (oe file at 


- 


Washington News Letter 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Bullding 


May 8.—Washington remained discreetly silent 
about developments in Europe last week, declining 
to make any comment on Colonel Beck’s reply to 
Chancellor Hitler, the sudden removal of M. Lit- 
vinov as Soviet Foreign Commissar, or the announce- 
ment that Germany and Italy intend to strengthen 
the Rome-Berlin axis by concluding a military alli- 
ance. In other fields, however, this world capital was 
actively engaged in diplomatic pursuits of its own, 
not wholly unrelated to events in Europe. 

PAN-AMERICAN DISPLAY. One activity occu- 
pying the attention of the Administration was the 
official visit of President Somoza of Nicaragua, 
which was made the occasion for the most elaborate 
military display seen in Washington for many years. 
The ostentatious pageantry of this reception con- 
trasted sharply with the simple greetings accorded to 
other foreign visitors in the past, and caused con- 
siderable wonderment among the thousands of gov- 
ernment workers who were granted a two-hour re- 
cess to assure a welcoming throng. 


The underlying purpose of the visit is fairly ob- 
vious, and is accepted here as part of the larger pro- 
gram launched last March with the visit of Foreign 
Minister Aranha of Brazil. At that time the Admin- 
istration gave evidence of its desire to strengthen 
Pan-American solidarity by extending economic and 
financial aid to Latin American countries, particu- 
larly those most vulnerable to encroachments by the 
totalitarian states. Senhor Aranha succeeded in ob- 
taining several important benefits, including a credit 
of $19,200,000 from the Export-Import Bank for 
lifting exchange restrictions, additional long-term 
credits to facilitate purchase of American products 
in Brazil, and the promise of a Treasury loan of 
$50,000,000. 

The probable results in the case of Nicaragua are 
far less impressive. While President Somoza is seek- 
ing to win support for the proposed Nicaraguan 
canal, he is not receiving much encouragement in 
Washington at the present time. The army and navy 
are not enthusiastic, and are actually pushing a 
project of their own for a third set of locks at Pan- 
ama, which can be completed at one-tenth the cost 
of a new canal across Nicaragua. It is possible that 
the Export-Import Bank will extend a modest credit 
of four or five million dollars for the development 
of public works and the expansion of foreign trade, 


but the resources of the Bank are limited and the 
prospects for greater aid are slim. 

Other Latin American countries are expected to 
send representatives to Washington in the near fu. 
ture. The Finance Minister of Chile, Senor Wach. 
oltz, has been invited to come here next month, and 
informal discussions have been held with Paraguay 
and several other countries. 


BARTER NEGOTIATIONS PROCEED. Another 
significant economic move was officially launched 
last week, when Britain agreed to open barter ne. 
gotiations with the United States looking toward the 
exchange of American wheat and cotton for British 


rubber and tin. This proposal was initiated in Wash- | 


ington early last month in an effort to find a partial 
solution for two pressing problems: (1) the pro- 
curement of reserve stocks of essential raw materials 
not produced in the United States; and (2) the dis- 
posal of large quantities of surplus wheat and cot- 
ton without dumping on the open market. While 


both Houses of Congress have recently passed legis- | 
| defin: 


lation authorizing the purchase of reserve stocks of 
strategic raw materials, the funds promised are far 
from adequate for building up large supplies. On 
the other hand, Congress has not yet found any 
satisfactory plan for dealing with the agricultural 
surpluses which is acceptable to the Administration. 

While the scope of the barter proposal has not 
been revealed, Secretary Hull has been forced to 
issue two statements explaining the nature of the 
transaction. Answering the criticism that his trade 
agreement program is being abandoned and out 
commercial policies reversed, Mr. Hull declared that 


“the idea now being explored is confined to the | 


acquisition of strategic materials, and strategic ma- 
terials only, as reserves for national emergencies. . .. 


One of the essential features of such an arrange: | 


ment would be an agreement on the part of other 
governments as well as our own to hold the acquired 
stocks as reserves” and not to dispose of them on 
commercial markets. 

Despite these explanations, and regardless of the 
possible advantages of these arrangements, some ob- 
servers in Washington are beginning to ask whether 


internal economic pressures and the activities of the | 


totalitarian nations are not forcing the United States 
to depart from some of its fundamental principles 
as embodied in the Good Neighbor policy and the 
reciprocal trade program. 

W. T. STONE 


Tr 


A } 
May 

annor 
and | 
to ea 
ing t 
this 


appal 
Black 


ranea 
simil. 
layed 
Sanja 
strate 


