




















Wa 
_| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN =—— 
re, An interpretation of ciel international events by the Research Staff ae - pty om 
Subscription, One Dollar a Year Office New York, 
don N. ¥., under the act 
ern, FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
Sels 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
bar- 
ital 
r of Vout. XVI, No. 26 Aprit 23, 1937 
rade THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF THE US.S.R. Dr. William W. Bishop 
the by Vera Micheles Dean 
5 to Far-reaching controversy has been aroused by the new Soviet * University of Michigan Library 
rger constitution which, according to Stalin, is based on principles of 
veek “extensive socialist democracy.” This view is challenged by ae s$ nh 
oup, Trotzky who regards the document as “an immense step back Ann Art 9 MsaCile 
a from socialist to bourgeois principles.” Mrs. Dean examines the 
ling constitution both in the light of Marxist doctrine and of the actual 
nth. course followed by the Soviet Union under Stalin’s leadership. 
Vian | April 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 25 cents 
ium, | 
a EUROPEAN POWERS SEEK GENERAL SETTLEMENT 
sen- 
Nor- HE announcement on April 16 that Premier 13-14 Dr. Schacht, German Minister of Eco- 
ites. Van Zeeland of Belgium—entrusted by France nomics, is thought to have discussed not only vari- 
ymic | and Britain with the task of exploring the possi- ous projects for improving trade relations be- 
xz bilities of international economic collaboration— tween the two countries, but the prospects for 
will visit President Roosevelt in June, has crys- international economic negotiations, in which 
tallized recent rumors that the two great European Belgium might play the réle of mediator between 
1987 democracies might take the lead in proposing a Germany and the Western democracies. While 
‘| general political and economic settlement. Ac- rumors of a Soviet-German rapprochement have 
lorful| cording to these rumors Britain, strengthened by been denied by both Berlin and Moscow, the Hitler 
its rearmament program, would depart from the government, as well as the German Reichswehr, 
ny J.| policy of avoiding commitments east of the Rhine has always favored economic collaboration with 
3.00 | and, in collaboration with France, would guaran- the U.S.S.R.; and it is reported that the Soviet 
ns Of} tee non-aggression treaties concluded by Germany Union, discouraged by the slow progress of ne- 
with Poland, Lithuania and Czechoslovakia. Such gotiations for a military accord implementing the 
Na} 2 move would lessen France’s responsibility for Franco-Soviet pact, might not be averse to a re- 
pread protection of peace in Eastern Europe, reassure orientation of foreign policy. 
ny in-}| the Soviet Union, and possibly permit modifi- Most striking of all has been the sudden relaxa- 
cation of the Franco-Soviet pact, which has tion of tension over Spain, which only three weeks 
.Ger-| hitherto proved the most serious obstacle to ago threatened to become the scene of a European 
German participation in negotiations for a West- conflict. The British government, determined 
eaned} ern Locarno. This general settlement would not to avoid any clash with Insurgents blockading 
involve cessions of European territory to Ger- the Loyalist port of Bilbao, has warned all British 
ridge, many but, according to the most optimistic ver- ships, even those carrying foodstuffs—not pro- 
ait. | Sion, might include return by France of the hibited by the non-intervention agreement—to 
| African colonies it obtained from Germany under remain outside Spanish territorial waters. This 
n W. League mandate. It is thought that the Hitler policy, which plays into the hands of the In- 
Press, | government, alarmed by the progress of French surgents and threatens Bilbao with starvation, 
and British rearmament, and realizing that it was denounced by the Labor party in the House 
bank-} cannot keep pace with the Western democracies, of Commons on April 14, but a Laborite vote of 
ro would welcome an opportunity to limit armaments censure was rejected by 345 votes to 130. 
y at existing levels, provided it obtains economic Britain’s determination to avoid a Mediter- 
aan and colonial advantages. The ground would thus ranean conflict was matched by Italy on April 15, 
be laid for international conferences on trade and when Count Grandi, Italian Ambassador to Lon- 
, with} arms limitation which would inaugurate an era don, reversed his previous position and told the 
basis} of genuine appeasement. non-intervention committee that he was ready to 
Among the many straws in this new wind blow- consider means of withdrawing foreign “volun- 
aul ing over Europe are Dr. Schacht’s visit to Brus- teers” fighting on both sides in the Spanish civil 
Editor.) Sels, reports of a German-Soviet rapprochement, war; whereupon the Soviet representative, M. 
r. relaxation of tension over Spain, and signs of a Maisky, agreed not to press his charges of an 
rift in the Italo-German alliance. During his con- Italian “invasion” of Spain. This new spirit of 
versations with Premier Van Zeeland on April conciliation enabled the non-intervention commit- 


























oe) ee i ee 


ae an a aptraat re see 





erent 








tee to inaugurate on April 19 the oft-postponed 
system of control over volunteers and war material 
bound for Spain by land or sea. 


That Mussolini’s change of front on Spain may 
be due to disappointment with the results of the 
“Rome-Berlin axis” is indicated by Italy’s recent 
manoeuvres in Southeastern Europe, where its 
interests clash with those of Germany. It seems 
increasingly clear that the Italo-Yugoslav pact 
was designed not only to protect Italy from rear- 
guard attack in case of a Mediterranean conflict 
with Britain, but to provide a barrier against Ger- 
man penetration in the Balkans, and may be fol- 
lowed by an attempt to bring the two other Little 
Entente countries—Rumania and Czechoslovakia 
—within the orbit of the Rome bloc composed of 
Italy, Austria and Hungary. This policy would 
find favor in Vienna, where Dr. Schuschnigg is 
energetically checking Nazi agitation, as well as 
in Budapest, where Premier Daranyi has taken 
strong measures against the Hungarian Nazi 
organization which had planned a putsch in early 
March. The Austrian Chancellor, alarmed by re- 
ports that Mussolini, in exchange for German 
support in Spain, had agreed to forego his oppo- 
sition to Anschluss and to block Hapsburg restora- 
tion, has been actively engaged in negotiations 
with Hungary and Czechoslovakia. He apparent- 
ly hopes to avoid the pitfalls of both Anschluss 
and restoration by developing an independent 
Austrian foreign policy based on reconstruction 
of a Danubian bloc embracing Austria, Hungary 
and the Little Entente. 

While recent developments in Europe offer 
ground for hope, it would be idle to minimize the 
obstacles which stand in the way of a general 
settlement. Chief among these, according to some 
observers, is Britain’s reluctance to abandon its 
rearmament program and liberalize its trade poli- 
cies. Although British rearmament has undoubt- 
edly proved one of the strongest factors in cre- 
ating a more conciliatory attitude on the part of 
Germany and Italy, continuance of the armaments 
race is not conducive to relaxation of economic 
tension. The prospects for European appease- 
ment would be immeasurably improved if Britain, 
while proceeding with rearmament and offering 
to use its new armaments on behalf of collective 
security, would at the same time display a genuine 
desire to consider Germany’s economic and colonial 


demands. VERA MICHELES DEAN 


PHILIPPINES ECONOMIC STUDY BEGINS 


The meeting on April 19 of a joint preparatory 
committee to study the economic future of the 


Page Two 








— 
ee 


Philippines marks the first concrete attempt to 
revise the inequitable trade provisions of the 
Philippine Independence Act. The committee, 
whose personnel was announced on April 14, jg 


composed of six Filipino and six American ex.| => 


perts who will work under the direction of Francis 
B. Sayre, Assistant Secretary of State. The 
American members are prominent government 
officials led by Joseph E. Jacobs, chief of the 
Office of Philippine Affairs in the State Depart. 
ment; the Filipinos, under the chairmanship of 
José Yulo, Philippine Secretary of Justice, are 
leaders of the powerful coalition supporting Presi- 
dent Quezon in the Islands. The committee’s re. 
port is expected late this year, and its recommen- 
dations may be presented to the next session of 


Congress as a program of action acceptable to 
both parties. 


The function of these experts, as set forth in a 
joint statement of President Quezon and Dr. Sayre 
on March 18, is to draw up a plan for termina- 
tion of preferential trade relations between the 
two areas “at the earliest practicable date con- 
sistent with affording the Philippines a reason- 
able opportunity to adjust their national econ- 
omy” to the new status. Subsequently a trade 
agreement on a non-preferential basis will regulate 
commerce between the two countries. President 
Quezon’s suggestion that independence be granted 
the Commonwealth in 1938 or 1939 will be con- 
sidered only in connection with its effect on the 
program of readjustment in trade relations. 


From the economic point of view, it is realized 
that preferences, especially for sugar, must be 
accorded the Islands at least until 1946 and very 
possibly after that date. The existing provisions 
for a sharp rise in American trade barriers from 
25 to 100 per cent of the tariff and abolition of all 
quotas, both to take place in 1946, are generally 
recognized as ruinous to the Philippines. 
committee is therefore expected to urge a less 
abrupt transition and also to recommend positive 
measures to decrease the Island’s excessive depen- 
dence on the export of sugar. By diversifying 
agriculture and encouraging mining and _ sec- 


ondary industries, much can be done to improve | 


the status of the Philippines as a competitor in 
the world market. Early independence would 
permit the Islands to make trade agreements with 
foreign countries and alter tariff barriers. But 
this salutary effect of freedom by 1939 must be 
balanced against the unwillingness of many mem- 


bers of Congress to extend any economic conces- ; 


sions whatever to the Philippines once inde- 
pendence is granted. DAviIp H. PopPER 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 26, Aprit 23, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lasimm Bugwt, President; Estusr G. Ocpen, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dgan, Editor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


The ; 





