


ited 
are 


ied, 


not 
vine 
lef 
ces 
1ces 
Mr. 
nd- 
will 
Lins 
hat 
vale 
the 


3 of 
wth, 


Das 
mic 


[ar- 


ted 
lent 
red. 
ent 

he 
aArt- 


jonal 
EAN, 
(eat. 





PURTQMEAL ROOF 
pene al LIBRARY 


ay 28 10% 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 
University of Wichigan 


Ann Arbor, Michtcan 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXV, No. 31 


May 17, 1946 





U.S. HEMISPHERE PLAN FURTHERS CREATION OF RIVAL WORLD BLOCS 


epee TRUMAN S announcement, on May 
6, of a program for coordinating the military 
forces of this hemisphere, coming in the wake of 
the lukewarm reception accorded to the four-power 
military alliance proposed by Secretary Byrnes at the 
Paris conference, represents our first move in a 
retreat into regionalism. The Administration’s pro- 
posal seeks to create in the New World a bloc 
of states which would act as a military unit and 
whose power would be so great as to eliminate 
the possibility of successful challenge from any 
other quarter. Notwithstanding the President’s as- 
surance that operations under the Inter-American 
Military Cooperation bill are to be fully consistent 
with the United Nations Charter, the policy would 
inevitably hasten the partition of the world into 
tival zones. Whether it would realize even its lim- 
ited objective depends, to some extent at least, on 
the willingness of the Latin American nations to 
combine with us 

MILITARY COOPERATION NOT ENOUGH. If 
the intention of the United States is to create a strong 
regional bloc, this is, at best, only a half-way meas- 
ure. Taking the narrowest view of our security re- 
quirements, it still leaves many questions unanswered. 
Foremost among them is the problem of the emer- 
gence on this continent of political ideologies which 
are opposed to our own. While experts believe that 
the Latin American nations are not at present able to 
make a major military contribution, they can be an 
important source of aid—and, by the same token, a 
source of trouble. In his message accompanying the 
bill, President Truman promised that care would be 
taken not to place weapons in the hands of any 
groups who might use them to oppose the principles 
to which the United States and other nations have 
subscribed. On the surface, at least, this provision 


would seem to exclude Argentina from participa- 
tion at the present time. Argentina with its ring of 
satellites, notably Paraguay and Bolivia, is the weak 
spot in the hemisphere armor. Our inability to get 
along either with or without Argentina is the di- 
lemma now confronting us in connection with the 
proposed mutual defense treaty, which is to imple- 
ment the Act of Chapultepec, and explains why the 
negotiation of the treaty has been repeatedly post- 
poned. For although the United States has expressed 
willingness to enter into such a treaty with all the 
American Republics except Argentina, the majority 
of the Republics find our position unacceptable. 


What these countries are concerned about is the 
prospect that the United States, through this arms 
measure, may wield still greater power in Latin 
American affairs—may, in fact, become the arbiter 
of their destinies. Supporters of the bill in Washing- 
ton argue that it will be the “attitude” of the several 
governments which influences the exchange of new 
armaments for obsolete equipment. President Tru- 
man’s statement that a special responsibility for 
leadership is incumbent on the United States because 
of its preponderant technical, economic and military 
resources was doubtless intended to have a reassur- 
ing effect on our Latin American neighbors; but for 
them it must have had sinister connotations. On the 
far side of the Rio Grande the term “hemisphere 
security” has a different meaning. To citizens of the 
United States, nurtured on the Monroe Doctrine, it 
still means the exclusion of foreign “colonizing” 
interests from the New World. But for the Latin 
Americans the Monroe Doctrine has been exclusive- 
ly a United States policy, which for fifty years they 
have tried to define and to limit through the inter- 
American system. Security to them means the neu- 
tralizing of yangui interference through the inter- 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 














—— - 








play of commercial and diplomatic rivalries between 
all great powers in Latin America. They, too, wel- 
comed the Act of Chapultepec—not, however, be- 
cause it assured New World security against a chal- 
lenge from abroad, but because the United States 
thereby imposed upon itself a self-denying ordinance. 

FENCE AROUND THE HEMISPHERE? The 
idea of a strong association of states of this hemis- 
phere has, since 1933 at least, been one of the guid- 
ing principles of United States foreign policy. Not 
until the war, however, were arrangements for mu- 
tual defense worked out, and at the Mexico City 
Conference of March 1945 there was a strong dis- 
position to maintain these arrangements in time of 
peace. The regional security system embodied in the 
Act of Chapultepec which grew out of this confer- 
ence, however, was eventually reconciled with the 
United Nations security system, albeit with some dif- 
ficulty. In the intervening months, no step has been 
taken toward formulating the Act into a permanent 
treaty, not only because of political differences with- 
in the inter-American system, but also, perhaps, be- 
cause hopes for a lasting peace centered on the work 
of the United Nations. The Inter-American Military 
Cooperation bill would provide a foundation for the 
proposed treaty. 

The Administration’s project is apparently de- 
signed to become the keystone of United States se- 
curity, following termination of lend lease. For some 
time the U.S. Army has informally been going about 
the task of standardizing the training and equip- 
ment of the armed forces of the other American 
Republics. But new Congressional authorization was 


MIXED MOTIVES INFLUENCE SENATE VOTE ON BRITISH LOAN 


A start toward breaking the peacemaking log jam 
at Paris was made last week when limited agreement 
on Italian colonies and reparations left Trieste as 
the principal question impeding negotiation of a 
final treaty with Italy. The progress of the Council 
of Foreign Ministers was paralleled in this country 
by a speed-up of the Washington legislative mill 
when on May 10 the Senate voted 46 to 34 to pass 
the British loan. But Senate action on the loan bill 
and further agreement on Italy will not, of them- 
selves, reverse the trend toward great-power division 
which has been growing more and more evident. 
Friction among the Big Three continues over the 
future position of Germany, still the key to the Euro- 
pean settlement, as well as in the Middle East and 
in Asia, where recent changes have given rise to 
deep-seated controversies among the victors. After 
a year of increasing tension such as invariably fol- 
lows in the wake of wars, some problems have be- 
come more embittered as the Paris discussions in- 
dicate, while others have considerably altered in 
character as revealed by the debate on the British 
loan. 


Page Two 











a 
ee 


needed to sell or transfer military equipment othe 
than a few surplus items. While the bill is thus , 
projection of lend lease, it is emphatically not ig. 
tended to give rise to an arms scramble in the Ame. 
icas. It would provide for the training of armed 
forces personnel, the maintenance of military o 
naval installations in New World countries, and the 
transfer to these countries of a wide variety of mij. 
itary equipment. What is contemplated under the 
latter provision is either direct sale or exchange of 
new for obsolete equipment, the value of the old 
equipment being taken into consideration in settin 
the price of the new material. Commodities—for ex. 
ample, surplus raw materials which the War o 
Navy Departments could stockpile—would be ac. 
ceptable payment in place of dollars. Under these 
conditions, with armaments being sold, not given 
away, it is expected that the United States will be 
able to exercise a certain measure of control as re 
gards the direction and amounts of armaments 
shipped to the Latin American Republics. 


The Military Cooperation bill, if followed through 
to its logical conclusion, would require some major 
readjustments of policy on the part of the Latin 
American nations. Wartime experience, which pro 
vided a foretaste of regionalism, revealed the re 
luctance of Latin Americans to commit themselves 
without reservation to the policies of any single 
great power, and some of the difficulties now con. 
fronting us in the southern part of the hemisphere 
are attributable to that experience. 

O.iveE HoLMEs 
(The first of two articles.) 


CHANGING PURPOSE OF THE LOAN. As 
suming, as the Administration now does, that the 
advancement of a $3,750,000,000 line of credit to 
Britain will be acceptable to the House of Represent: 
atives, it is important to understand what changes 
have affected the British loan during its course 
through Congress. Many Congressmen who now 
support the bill do so less because of the economic 
benefits it is expected to bring than for its antic: 
pated political advantages. Originally offered as the 
major item on Washington’s post-war foreign eco- 
nomic program, this loan—like other proposed gov- 
ernment loans to France and Poland—has in recent 
months taken on political implications. While the 
Polish loan is now held in abeyance, no specific 
promise has been obtained from other nations—as 
was done in the case of Poland, where free elections 
were part of the quid pro quo. But the belief that 
Britain, if it receives the credit, will be in a stronger 
position to counterbalance Russia’s economic and 
political power has played an important part in dis 
cussion of the loan. 

This change in sentiment has been due to 4 


—_— 


marked 
and als 
favor « 
by gov 
at the 

progral 
strivins 
pered | 
sitate | 
econon 


good ¢ 


8 | the pri 


it is bu 
Wa: 
joan is 
to con 
and w 
laxing 
the Ac 
ly thai 
tariffs. 
the ca 
tries 
tiles n 
There 
progr: 
port t: 
fun, \ 
ports 

PO 
that, 

Britis! 
ment 

econo 
the lo 
Russi 
loan, 

ment: 
our f 
the b 


do nc 








a Il 


w 
& 


eaFekRre eae & 


old 
ing 


or 
ac 


Dr0- 


Ives 
igle 
On 
rere 


the 
t to 





_—_— 
—_— 





marked change in public opinion toward Russia, 
and also to the fact that the economic arguments in 
favor of the loan were never made entirely clear 
by government officials. Had the loan been offered 
at the outset as the first item of our foreign trade 
program, with the explicit indication that we were 
striving for a system of multilateral trade, unham- 
pered by restrictions and tariffs, which would neces- 
sitate certain major readjustments within our own 
economy, then Americans could have decided in 
good conscience whether they were prepared to pay 
the price for the loan and the trade policy of which 
itis but a part. 

Washington officials have pointed out that, if the 
loan is passed by Congress, the British have agreed 
to consider reduction of their imperial preferences 
and will restore the convertibility of sterling by re- 
laxing exchange controls of the sterling area. But 
the Administration has never emphasized sufficient- 
ly that we also are thereby obligated to reduce our 
tariffs. If we are to reduce tariffs, however, some of 
the capital and labor now involved in such indus- 
ries as cotton growing, wool production and tex- 
tiles might have to be transferred to other industries. 
There has also been little concrete planning for a 
program which would substantially increase our im- 
port trade, yet such a program is vital if, in the long 
fun, we are to find markets for our anticipated ex- 
ports and be repaid for our present loans. 


POLICIES VS. PRACTICE. It is hardly surprising 
that, lacking a forthright approach, debate on the 
British loan has been so confused. Much biased argu- 
ment against Britain has been heard, a return to 
«onomic isolation advocated, and in some quarters 
the loan has been welcomed as an instrument of anti- 
Russian policy. The evolution of the British 
an, from its initial announcement to near-imple- 
mentation, illustrates many points characteristic of 
our foreign aims and commitments. We start with 
the best intentions and highest moral principles, but 
do not consider the practical steps necessary to trans- 


——— Page Three 





Just Published— 


THE AXIS SATELLITES AND THE 
GREAT POWERS by Cyril E. Black 
An analysis of problems now under discussion in Paris— 


| and a survey of the patterns of democratic renasccace in 
Finland, Rumania, Hungary and Bulgaria. 











25 cents 
| May 1 issue of FoREIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the 1st and 15th of each month 


Subscriptions $5.00; to F.P.A. members, $3.00 | 





a 




















form our objectives into reality. This faulty approach 
causes disillusionment about the organization of the 
peace, with resulting apathy and inaction among 
the public. United States opinion cannot function 
properly if it lacks information about the full con- 
sequences and alternatives of a given policy. 


This has been demonstrated in the question of 
Iran where, for lack of concrete official proposals to 
ease tension in the Middle East, the American public 
has been unable to register its views effectively. Con- 
sidering the impasse which has been reached in the 
United Nations Council and the difficulties met at 
Paris, it is by no means certain that more specific 
plans for international action on oil resources of the 
Middle East, for example, or for future joint control 
of Germany and strategic areas in the Mediterra- 
nean, will gain the adherence of all the Big Three. 
Yet a margin of time remains before the division of 
the world into competing economic and political 
blocs need occur. There is still an opportunity for 
the United States to urge concrete policies that might 
re-establish unity among the Big Three. But this 
cannot be done by half-way measures, or by measures 
whose ultimate effects, as in the case of the British 
loan, are not made clear to the American people. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 





The First Freedom, by Morris L. Ernst. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1946. $3.00 


The author finds a trend toward control of public opinion 
media by a relatively small group of owners. He believes 
that a danger of monopolism exists in the motion picture 
industry, in radio broadcasting and in publishing, and 
urges wider competition to insure complete freedom of 
expression. 


Iran, by William S. Haas. New York, Columbia University 
Press, 1946. $3.50 


Timely survey of Persian history, geography, customs, 
religion, psychology, culture, and economic and political 
life by a German scholar who spent five years as an ad- 
viser to the Persian Ministry of Education before he came 
to the United States in 1940. 


Italian Democracy in the Making, by A. W. Salomone. 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1945. 
$2.50 


A study of politics in the Giolittian period, 1900-1914, 
which helps in understanding how Italian politics led to 


Fascism. Gaetano Salvemini has written an interesting in- 
troduction. 


The Regions of Germany, by R. E. Dickinson. New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1945. $3.50 


A geographer expertly examines the salient features of 
the “natural” provinces of Germany, as opposed to the 
political provinces, and suggests a regional reorganiza- 
tion of the Reich which would nullify the traditional over- 
emphasis on Prussia. 





REIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 31, May 17, 


S81 








1946. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Natienal 
“adquarters, 22 East 38th Screet, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President Emeritus; DorotHy F. Lert, Secretary; Vera Micueres Dagan, 
Uitor, Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
Pease allow at least one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 








Washington News Letter 

















POORLY INFORMED PUBLIC UNABLE TO JUDGE FOREIGN POLICY ISSUES 


Those who believe that public opinion guides 
Congress and the President in the making of for- 
eign policy are under the impression that the Ameri- 
can people are slipping back into isolationism. The 
perplexing contradiction in the foreign policy of 
the United States today is that it is internationalist 
in its main outlines but not in its details. The coun- 
try has not yet taken the steps that would make the 
internationalism represented by membership in the 
United Nations organization truly effective. Friends 
of Secretary of State James F. Byrnes, noting his 
difficulties at the Council of Foreign Ministers 
which opened in Paris on April 25, have been com- 
plaining that he is forced to move by inches instead 
of leagues in dealing with other governments be- 
cause the people will support him only so far. Yet 
it is not clear just what the superficial evidence of 
isolationism reveals. An immovable popular re- 
sistance to abandonment of isolationism? Or a costly 
lack of leadership? The early failures and later 
successes of President Roosevelt in the sphere of 
foreign policy indicate that the American people will 
not support what they do not understand, but that 
they will uphold proposals whose importance and 
meaning are made clear to them. 

HOME INFORMATION PROGRAM. Repre- 
sentative Edith Nourse Rogers of Massachusetts, a 
Republican member of the House Committee on 
Foreign Affairs, said on March 16 that the State 
Department did not give Congress and the people 
enough information about foreign policy. While 
the State Department has improved its facilities for 
distributing information to the country, its program 
cannot always get at the roots of the problem, be- 
cause political leadership belongs not to the State 
Department information officer, no’ matter how tal- 
ented and enlightened he may be, but to the Presi- 
dent. He is the chosen spokesman of the nation. The 
Constitution, and the practice of many years, give 
the President control of foreign policy. 

Specifically, the question is whether the people 
of the United States would encourage the govern- 
ment more readily than they do to lend money to 
other nations, to send food abroad, and to maintain 
armed forces sufficient to fulfill the nation’s com- 
mitments, if they had received adequate information 
from the President about the need for such meas- 
ures. Loans, relief and military strength are three 
indispensable props of our basic foreign policy of 
. international cooperation. 

With respect to food, President Truman has de- 


clined to institute rationing—yet the United States 
has been unable to make good its obligations jy 
UNRRA. The value of our exports in the UNRRA 
program declined from $125,290,000 in January tp 
$91,194,000 in February. The President believe 
that the public would not support restoration of 
rationing. Yet when wartime food rationing was 
removed last autumn, the public was not informed 
that the United States would be called on for many 
months to share large portions of its food supply 
with hungry Europeans and Asiatics. On the cop. 
trary, Secretary of Agriculture Clinton B. Anderson 
indicated in a statement in September 1945 that 
coming harvests overseas would alleviate the food 


shortages of foreign countries. The harvests proved] | 


small, and food shortages became acute. The people 
of the United States were given no chance to make 
up their minds, on the basis of adequate inform: 
tion, whether they wanted rationing or not. 

NO LEADERSHIP IN MILITARY POLICY. 
Except for continuing the present conscription pro 
gram to July 1, Congress has refused to legislate on 
military affairs. Yet certainty that the United States 
will have a strong army and navy is necessary for 
firm conduct of our foreign policy. The United Na 
tions requires a contribution of armed forces from 
each member of the Security Council, of which this 
country is a permanent member. Our policy of ne 
tional security, moreover, is founded on a program 
of strategic bases, which cannot be maintained with 
out large armed forces. 

When President Truman on October 23, 194) 
submitted to Congress a proposal for a permanent 
program of universal service, the American people 
were showing a distaste for the military life whic 
persists to this day. As soon as Japan offered to sur 
render last August, men in service and their civilian 
relatives began to press the War and Navy Depatt 
ments and Congress to demobilize hastily. At the 
moment of surrender President Truman took m 
steps to forestall these demands. He did not explaif 


to the public that the army and navy which had) 


saved us in war were needed to carry out our peace 
time international leadership. While he took pass 
ing notice of pressure for demobilization five weeks 
later, on October 27 he spoke with pride of the 
country’s military power. Two days later Gener 
George C. Marshall, then Army Chief of Staff, pro 
tested that demobilization had weakened the arm] 
to the point of ‘“demoralization.” 
BLAIR BOLLEs 








