
















illey 


Pain 
Mo- 
> 21 
ica 
he 
nted 
Ver 
rate 


ved 
that 


tals, } 


free 
| 90 


ring 
43, 
hill, 
‘tee 
ees 
ited 
, 
ited 
in, 


East } 
: of | 


tely 
ula- 


of 
also 


The }. 


bat 
ria. 
gee 
yrk, 
for 
ing 

of 
the 
for 


tes, 
ob- 
in 


led 








AL ROOM 
AL LIBRARY 
anty. oF mice. 





~ 


: Entered as 2nd class matter 
General Library a aaa 


University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Michigan 





| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 











An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





Vou. XXIII, No. 38 


JuLy 7, 1944 





FRENCH UNDERGROUND ACTIVITIES SPEED UNDERSTANDING WITH U.S. 


ee. DE GAULLE's visit to Washington, 

following close upon the Allied capture of the 
port of Cherbourg, indicates the rapidity with which 
events have moved under the impact of military 
operations. The initial Allied successes in the field 
have not only established a base for further opera- 
tions in France, but also tend to resolve the crisis in 
Franco-Allied relations produced at the outset of 
the invasion when de Gaulle refused to allow pre- 
viously designated French liaison officers to accom- 
pany the first invading forces. Now, however, Lon- 
don reports of June 30 indicate that the British have 
reached a draft accord with representatives of the 
French Committee of National Liberation on cur- 
tency control and the administration of civil affairs 
in France—matters which are doubtless the center of 
current discussions in Washington. 


RECOGNITION OF UNDERGROUND. This 
improvement of the French political situation has 
been due as much to the effective role of the re- 
sistance forces within France during the first month 
of the invasion as to any other single factor. Gen- 
eral Eisenhower's headquarters has testified that the 
many recent acts of sabotage throughout France 
“contributed directly to the Allied success,” although 
it is yet too early to determine the degree of coor- 
dinated effort they represent. On June 25 Supreme 
Headquarters announced the appointment of Gen- 
eral Joseph-Pierre Koenig, hero of the battle of Bir 
Hacheim, as Commander of the French Forces of the 
Interior, acting directly under General Eisenhower. 

In effect this arrangement gives a new status to 
the underground movement, which is now repre- 
sented on the Allied staff by an officer close to de 
Gaulle. The General and his aides were warmly 
welcomed during their visit to the Normandy beach- 
head, but a complete picture of the resistance forces 
will be available only when the armies of liberation 
have moved further into France. The underground 


movement is probably more complex than either the 
pro- or anti-de Gaullists would admit. There is both 
individual and group resistance, organized along 
both social and national lines. Reports of sabotage 
in factories and on the railways suggest the combined 
action of workers who are known to have organized 
through the framework of the former labor unions 
—the Confédération Générale du Travail and the 
Catholic union, Confédération Francaise des Travail- 
leurs Chrétiens. 

The most outstanding activity has been that of the 
““Maquis”’ and, in the past month, the Germans have 
found it necessary to use tanks, artillery and aircraft 
against them in their stronghold in the Haute Savoie 
region and in south-central France east of Bordeaux. 
In and near the key city of Lyon, the “Maquis” seti- 
ously hampered the Germans in their attempt to use 
the Rhone valley transport system to move troops 
and material into the Normandy sector. Similar ac- 
tivity in the Paris environs is credited with further 
delaying German defenses in the territory becween 
the Seine and Loire rivers, so crucial to the further 
expansion of Allied forces from Cherbourg and 
Caen. On June 28 the Patriots made their most 
dramatic move by assassinating the Vichy Minister 
of Information and Propaganda, Philippe Hentiot. 
Official French sources in London admit the German 
claim that this daring act was perpetrated under the 
direction of the Forces of the Interior. 


EFFECT ON GERMAN DEFENSES. Aside from 
the immediate aid given to the Allied armies, the 
underground will also prove important in its con- 
tinued attacks on German supply lines. The Allies, 
having secured a sector of the European continent, 
are fighting with what are virtually interior lines of 
supply—from Britain. The Nazi armies will from this 
point forward experience the difficulties inherent in 
extended lines of communications. The French 
Forces of the Interior can be most effective in harass- 











oe aE 


rte 
EL, “t 
ne ap geen 


SaaS ee me 
Po at 1S 


Nghia Tine 


ae 


r op i Recomm : Sime = ‘ 
er SLE el Ca lk Di 8 Tl aa on 


rn 





: ing the Germans in their exposed positions, for 














supply routes, bridges and canals which are not 
actually attacked must be guarded. As General 
Koenig organizes and equips the resistance forces, 
they will aid the invasion troops in making the de- 
fensive position of the Nazi armies in France in- 
creasingly untenable. 


With the second front a reality, and the re-open-’ 


ing of the Russian offensive, the Wehrmacht is more 
sorely pressed for manpower than at any period 
during the war. For the first time, the Germans will 
be unable to release men for the coming harvest 
either in Germany or in those parts of Europe that 
may still be occupied by autumn. The year-long 





Page Two — 


ee 





strategic bombings have also presented the Germans 
with problems beyond their control. The very notable 
decline in strength of the Luftwaffe may be directly 
attributed to the air attacks on the Ploesti oil fields 
in Rumania and the synthetic gasoline industry jig 
the Reich. Fear of further Allied landings, of course, 
immobilizes troops for the full length of the Atlantic 
coast. All of these factors, but in particular the haz. 
ardous supply situation now that active military op. 
erations are under way in France, may necessitate 
large-scale German withdrawals once the Allies can 
expand to the Seine and Loire rivers in their east. 
ward push. 


GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


REPUBLICAN PLATFORM SHOWS CONTRADICTIONS ON FOREIGN POLICY 


In the platform adopted in Chicago on June 27, 
the Republican party recognizes that American voters 
are intent not only on winning this war but also 
on preventing the recurrence of similar wars in the 
future. As foreshadowed by the Mackinac resolu- 
tion of September 7, 1943, the party comes out in 
favor of “responsible participation by the United 
States in post-war cooperative organization among 
sovereign nations to prevent military aggression and 
to attain permanent peace with organized justice in a 
free world.” It rejects the concept of a world state, 
and makes no reference to an international police 
force. Instead the platform states that the organiza- 


' tion it envisages should “develop effective coopera- 


tive means to direct peace forces to prevent or repel 
military aggression.” While the phrase “peace 
forces’” was regarded by some members of the reso- 
lutions committee as ambiguous, it is said to have 
been suggested by Senator Austin in whose native 
Vermont this phrase is used to describe the police 
force, and could presumably be so ‘interpreted—al- 
though spokesmen for the Chicago Tribune point of 
view might think otherwise. The Republican plat- 
form also acknowledges “that peace and security do 
not depend upon the sanction of force alone, but 
should prevail by virtue of reciprocal interests and 
Spiritual values,” and declares that it shall seek “‘in 
our relations with other nations, conditions cal- 
culated to promote world-wide economic stability.” 


PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT’S VIEWS. The gen- 
eral wording of the Republican platform on these 
points does not differ fundamentally from the state- 
ment issued by President Roosevelt on June 15, in 
which he said that the purpose of the international 
organization he had in mind “would be to maintain 

ce and security and to assist the creation, through 
international cooperation, of conditions of stability 
and well-being necessary for peaceful and friendly 
relations among nations.” Like the Republicans, the 
President rejected the idea of a world state. “We are 
not thinking,” he declared, “of a superstate with its 


own police forces and other paraphernalia of coer 
cive power. We are seeking effective agreement and 
arrangements through which the nations would 
maintain, according to their capacities, adequate 
forces to meet the needs of preventing war and of 
making impossible deliberate preparation for war, 
and to have such forces available for joint action 
when necessary.” The Republican platform and the 
President’s statement may be said to represent the 
furthest limits to which, in the judgment of poli- 
tical leaders of both parties, the American people 
would be prepared at this time to go in collaborating 
with other nations. The real test of both declarations 
will, of course, be the concrete measures the two 
parties are prepared to sponsor in order to implement 
their pledges. 


CLAUSE ON TARIFFS DISTURBING. The Re- 
publican platform, outwardly at least, appears to 
accept the view that the United States can no longer 
hope to play a lone hand in world affairs, and in its 
own self-interest must find ways and means of work- 
ing with other nations in the common tasks of post- 
war reconstruction. Yet several points in the plat- 
form—admittedly, as usual, a compromise between 
divergent views—make one wonder whether its fram- 
ers realized the implications of the promises they 
drafted. If the Republican party intends “to promote 
world-wide economic stability,” should it not whole- 
heartedly support the reciprocal trade agreements, 
the one concrete if modest measure this country took 
in that direction during the inter-war years? Yet the 
platform says that henceforth tariffs “should be 
modified only by reciprocal bilateral trade agree- 
ments approved by Congress.” This is a double 
barreled threat to the reciprocal trade program. First, 
the trade agreements sponsored by Secretary of State 
Hull, while bilateral in character, have been mullti- 


lateral in effect, their benefits being passed on to ~ 


other nations under the most-favored-nation clause. 


Second, the need for Congressional approval would © 


jeopardize the program, one of whose great advan- 


— 


tages | 
of the 
to tech 
press i 
Repub 
trade | 
a Rep 
suppo 
The R 
voted 
gram 
ess; 
“id a 
press 
TW 
NAT 
recipr 
comm 
the C 
agree 
ganiz 
with 
be m: 
the S 
of th 
party 
const 
treat: 
urgec 
Presi 
sitior 
the « 
man} 
the 1 
an Cc 
unde 
every 
with 
two- 
tive. 
wou 
¥ 
plat 
: stan 











Faas es 


le 
1g 


vo 
nt 


er 
its 
rk. 


at- 


ey 
te 
le- 
ts, 














BBV VA SP DS wd Oo mM. Wg 


— 
: z 


7 tages was that trade negotiations had been taken out 
of the hands of special interest lobbies and entrusted 
to technical experts. True, Mr. Dewey, at his Chicago 
press conference of June 29, said that he hoped “the 
Republicans would continue to carry out the Hull 
trade program” which, he added, “has always been 
a Republican policy.” The voting record does not 
support the latter part of Mr. Dewey's statement. 
The Republican members of both House and Senate 
voted overwhelmingly against the Hull trade pro- 
gram in 1934, when it was first presented to Con- 
gress; in 1937; and again in 1940. Not until 1943 
did a majority of the Republicans in Congress ex- 
press approval of the program. 














TWO-THIRDS VOTE CLAUSE UNFORTU- 


NATE. The emphasis on Congressional approval of 
reciprocal trade agreements is matched by the specific 
commitment in the party platform that, “pursuant to 
the Constitution of the United States any treaty or 
agreement to attain such aims [of international or- 
ganization} made on behalf of the United States 
with any other nation or association of nations shall 
be made only by and with the advice and consent of 
the Senate of the United States, provided two-thirds 
of the Senators concur.”” Not only did the Republican 
party thus pass up the opportunity of proposing a 
constitutional amendment for the ratification of 
treaties by a plain majority vote, as has been widely 
urged. It also failed to recognize that if, as former 
President Hoover predicts, there will be a long tran- 
sition period between the cessation of hostilities and 
the emergence of a more or less peaceful world, 
many undertakings will have to be entered into by 
the United States which will not have the scope of 
an overall peace treaty and can be expeditiously 
undertaken only through executive agreements. If 
every measure this country is to take in cooperation 
with other nations is to be subjected to the test of a 


two-thirds vote in the Senate, the prospect of effec- 
tive action by one of the greatest powers in the world 
would be decidedly dim. 

What is even more disturbing, the Republican 
platform reveals the same tendency to apply a double 
standard in international affairs that has character- 


RECALL OF ALLIED AMBASSADORS 


The recall last week of American Ambassador 
Norman Armour from Buenos Aires for consulta- 
tion in Washington, accompanied by the similar 
tecall of the British Ambassador, Sir David Kelley, 
highlights the growing difficulties in relations be- 
tween the United States and Argentina. This country 
and Britain have declined to recognize the regime 


} of President Farrell, and have no diplomatic con- 


tacts with that regime. This situation is in striking 


} Contrast to the decision of the United States, Britain, 
} and eighteen of the American republics to recognize, 


Page Three 
















ized the pronouncements and actions of both major 
political parties in the past. The Republicans declare 
—dquite understandably—that they will “at all times 
protect the essential interests and resources of the 
United States.” Yet they promptly take the liberty 
of intervening in interests regarded as essential by 
another nation—Britain—by laying down the law 
to the British as to the best method of dealing with 
the thorny problem of Palestine. What is sauce for 
the goose should be sauce for the gander. If the 
United States is to insist on all the rights and pre- 
rogatives of sovereignty, it is hardly in a position to 
question the right of other nations to do the same— 
even if, on occasion, the exercise of sovereignty by 
other nations shocks or troubles the conscience of © 
Americans. We should be free to criticize our allies 
—but we should not regard any adjustments they 
may, in turn, ask us to make as a derogation of our 
sovereignty. 

The Republicans—and the Democrats too—speak 
much of sovereignty and envisage the international 
organization of the future as an association of sov- 
ereign nations. But what is sovereignty? If the people 
of this country should, in the exercise of their 
sovereign rights, decide that certain adjustments, and 
even sacrifices, on the part of the United States, in 
collaboration with other nations, will serve the in- 
terests of this country best, this would be a proper 
use of sovereignty. As Wendell Willkie said in his 
criticism of the Republican party on June 26, to use 
our position of leadership “for our own enrichment 
and that of mankind, will not be to weaken the sov- 
ereign power of the American people; it will be to 
widen it and make it more real.” 

There now seems little doubt that the thoughtful 
leaders of both major political parties are aware of 
the need for participation by the United States in 
some form of international organization. How to 
pass from words to deeds is the next task that must 
be faced not only by political leaders, but by the 
entire electorate, whose understanding and support 
will determine the course political leaders will feel 
both impelled and free to take. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


UNDERLINES ARGENTINE CRISIS 


on June 23, the government of President Villaroel in 
Bolivia, six months after the armed revolt that 
overthrew the pro-Allied government of General 
Pefiaranda. This decision followed the ouster from 
the Bolivian cabinet of several of Villaroel’s follow- 
ers who were known to be pro-Nazi, and had been 
closely associated with Argentine officials before they 
carried out their anti-Pefiaranda coup. On the basis 
of a report on conditions in Bolivia, prepared by 
Avra Warren, American Ambassador to Panama, 
and submitted to all governments of South and Cen- 


SS eee 





: gs z 
ROR Ne ee he a 
FD eatin 


ikea ae 





ee 


a 
ee ee ee as 


a 
= t —— 


EE err nernmromnsectinees 

> eo 

we a ee ee: 
= 


a — 





ees ee ete ee see 


1d annie RS NO TN 


ak Beats. 


ree ae ee 


TH 


a 











tral American republics without recommendation, 
it was jointly decided to recognize the Villaroel re- 
gime at this time, without waiting for the general 
elections which are to be held on July 2. 
Meanwhile, our political relations with Argentina 
are at the lowest ebb they have ever reached, al- 
though our economic ties remain close. The strict 
censorship enforced by the Farrell regime prevents 
Argentines from learning the views and_policies of 
the United States. For example, Argentina banned 
President Roosevelt's statement regarding the 
planned transfer of small naval vessels by the United 
States to South American countries, as well as his 
Statement to Congress of June 12 condemning perse- 
cution of Jewish and other minorities in Europe. It is 
difficult as yet to see how the existing deadlock with 


SOME RECENT BOOKS ON RUSSIA 


The Russian Army: its Men, its Leaders and its Battles, 
by Walter Kerr. New York, Knopf, 1944. $2.75 


A competent study of the organization and activities of 
the Russian Army, by a former Moscow correspondent of 
the New York Herald Tribune. Particularly interesting 
for its analysis of the Battles of Moscow and Stalingrad, 
and its description of guerrilla warfare. 


The Growth of the Red Army, by D. Fedotoff White. 
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1944. $3.75 


A Russian-born expert on shipping gives a detailed 
and scholarly history of the development of Russia’s 
armed might from the early days of the Bolshevik revolu- 
tion to the present time, with special emphasis on recent 
changes wrought by industrialization and political educa- 
tion of the army. 


Russia and Post-War Europe, by David J. Dallin. New 
Haven, Yale University Press, 1943. $2.75 


Mr. Dallin, a Russian Socialist who lived in exile from 
1911 to 1914, and again from 1921 to the present time, 
explores the motives and methods of the Soviet govern- 
ment in international affairs. Although throughout his 
book he takes the view that Russia has far-reaching terri- 
torial and spheres of influence objectives in Europe, he 
comes to the conclusion that “an alliance with the great 
nations of the west rather than with the multitude of 
small nations in eastern Europe . . . accords better with 
Russia’s needs as well as with the national sentiments in 
the country.” 


Page Four 





Have the reciprocal agreements aided U.S. trade? 
What effect has war had on the trade program? 
READ— 
RECIPROCAL TRADE PROGRAM AND 
POST-WAR RECONSTRUCTION 


by Howard P. Whidden, Jr. 


25c 


April 1, 1943 issue of Foreicn Poticy Reports 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription $5; to F.P.A. members, $3. 

















—— 
—, . 


Argentina will be broken. Argentina is in a favor. | 191 


able economic position, since-it has surpluses of meat ) 
and wheat which will be needed by the liberated 
countries of Europe the moment hostilities are over, 
and apparently believes it can “sit out the war,” 
Meanwhile, former Undersecretary of State Welles, 
who played an important part in the development } 
of the Good Neighbor policy, has deplored Wash. 
ington’s policy toward Argentina as ‘‘the short. 
sighted attempt of the Department of State to utilize 
inter-American machinery for the purpose of co} 
ercing the Argentine Republic,” adding: “There is 
no room for the coercion of any American state by 
another in the present system of inter-American un. 
derstanding.” 


4 


SypNorR H. WALKER 


The Siege of Leningrad, by Boris Skomorovsky and E. G. 
Morris. New York, Books, Inc. Distributed by E. P. 
Dutton & Company, 1944. $2.50 


This little book, pieced out of letters, diaries, verses and 
stories written by the courageous inhabitants of Lenin. 
grad, of all ages and in different walks of life, conveys, 
in spite of its unevenness, a vivid feeling of the trials 
undergone during the German siege, and the spirit with 
which these trials were faced. 


The Russian Enigma: An Interpretation, by William 
Henry Chamberlin. New York, Scribner’s, 1943. $2.75 


A veteran interpreter of Russia, who never hesitates to 
speak his mind, summarizes the main trends of the coun- 
try’s development under Soviet rule, and expresses the 
hope that “there will emerge, out of the present ordeal of 
humanity, in which the Russian people have played a 
heroic part, a Free Russia, an integral and inseparable 
part of a Free World.” 


What Russia Wants, by Joachim Joesten. New York, | 
World Book Company, distributed by Duell, Sloan and 
Pearce, 1944. $2.50 


The author, German-born assistant editor of Newsweek, 
anlayzes Russia’s territorial problems with its neighbors 
West and East, and views their adjustment in a hopeful 
spirit, on the theory that “where there’s a will there’s a 
way.” 


Russia and the United States, by Pitirim A. Sorokin. New 
York, Literary Classics, distributed by E. P. Dutton and 
Company, 1944. $3.00 


Professor Sorokin, Russian-born chairman of the De- 
partment of Sociology at Harvard University, expresses 4 
firm conviction that Russia and the United States will 
find concrete bases for collaboration in the post-war world. 


Russia and the Peace, by Bernard Pares. New York, Mac- 
millan, 1944. $2.50 


A well-known British authority on Russian history 





writes sympathetically, if somewhat chattily, about various 
aspects of Russia’s domestic and foreign affairs from the 
vantage point of historical perspective. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIII, No. 38, Jury. 7, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MiCHELES Dean, Editor. Entered # 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


e181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


| 








