





fat: 
not 
32} 
ved 
in 
ttle 








asti- | 
‘ire: | 
lion 

r of | 
tate 

; of | 
ules | 


vith 


--559D Entered as 2nd Glass matter 


I'rni $4 o tes 
niw _ e ™ ‘ 
Univers y ; ‘o) 
~ YJ 4 2 .0ii 


, a a | 
’ = Ww A 
igan Library 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 5 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 





An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 





VoL. XXI, No. 2 


OcToBER 31, 1941 





SOVIET RESISTANCE HINGES ON OUTSIDE AID 


— Berlin’s reported occupation of Kharkov, 
the great industrial and railway center in the 
Ukraine, and with Moscow and Rostov seriously 
endangered, it has become increasingly evident fhat 
the greatest threat of the Nazi offensive might not 
be to Russia itself, but to the British, who have been 
forced to prepare for the possibility of a Nazi thrust 
toward the Caucasus. While some of the Soviet gov- 
ernment departments and the diplomatic corps left 
Moscow on October 16 for Kuibyshev (Samara) on 
the Volga, Stalin remains in Moscow, and has ordered 
the organization of new Russian armies by Mar- 
shals Budenny and Voroshilov. It is still conceiv- 
able that, even if the Nazis should occupy Moscow, 
the Russians might succeed in establishing a sec- 
ondary line of defense east of the capital, on the 


i Volga. 


The chief obstacle to continued Russian resistance, 
in this event, will be the loss of important industrial 
regions in the Ukraine, including the Donets basin, 
with its tremendous coal deposits and metallurgical 
plants. The Russians, however, had been preparing 
over a period of years for just such a contingency 
by developing a secondary industrial region in the 
Urals. While neither the raw material resources of 
the Urals nor the industrial plant established in that 
tegion are comparable with those of the Ukraine 


and the Donets basin, it is not outside the realm of 


possibility that the Russians might succeed in main- 
taining a limited supply of armaments for a re- 
organized Red Army during the winter months. If 
the Soviet-German war should continue on any large 
scale through the winter, however, the Russians 
will be in desperate need of armaments which only 
Britain and the United States can supply. 
WESTERN AID TO RUSSIA. Any program of 
aid to the Soviet Union is confronted with two major 
difficulties: first, Britain and the United States are 
hot yet producing tanks and airplanes in sufficient 


quantities to offset the enormous losses in material 
suffered by the Russians, at a time when they must 
also supply other fronts, in Britain itself, in Africa, 
and in the Near and Middle East; and, second, the 
three routes available for the delivery of such sup- 
plies— through Archangel in northern Russia, 
through the Persian Gulf and across Iran in the 
south, and through Vladivostok in the Far East— 
are all fraught with serious complications. Archan- 
gel, a port used by the Allies for this same purpose 
during the first World War, is icebound during the 
winter months; and while it could be kept open 
part of the winter by powerful icebreakers, the route 
from the East Coast ports of the United States to 
Archangel is vulnerable to attack by German sub- 
marines, and the principal railway which could 
carry freight from Archangel to central Russia might 
be disrupted by the German advance. The route 
through the Persian Gulf, as has already been 
pointed out in this Bulletin, is not only slow, but 
laborious, because the railway across Iran has not 
yet been linked with the Russian railway in the 
Caucasus—and this route, too, might be menaced by 
a German thrust eastward. The route from the West 
Coast ports of the United States to Vladivostok 
could be threatened by the Japanese, should Tokyo 
decide to enter the war against Russia or the United 
States, or both. When the Maritime Commission, 
through what appears to have been a blunder, re- 
vealed on October 22 that shipments to Russia— 
but by no means all shipments, as was subsequently 
explained—would go after October 28 from the port 
of Boston (which had been clamoring for its share 
of the business), it was immediately assumed by 
many people that the route to Vladivostok, previ- 
ously used for shipments of oil to Russia, had been 
abandoned in deference to protests by Japan. 


BRITISH DEMAND FOR INVASION. As the 
manifold difficulties of delivering sufficient supplies 
































—— = == Page Two —: | — 
to Russia in time to turn the tide of the present important as they may be for the record, do not take | pjet : 
campaign have become gradually apparent, many the place of the armaments needed by those who are! with | 
Britishers, especially in Labor circles, have demanded resisting the Nazi “new order” in occupied countries | jgpan 
that Britain give direct aid to Russia by invading Some Britishers, recognizing the value of the aid : ” fi 
the continent while the bulk of the German forces they might obtain from the peoples of occupied} patiot 
are tied up on the eastern front. This demand, countries, have considered the possibility of open! Th 
voiced also in the House of Commons, has brought ing a bridgehead for operations on the continent not | piet 
from the government the reply that Britain is not through the ports of Western Europe, fortified and | staffe 
in a position to risk an invasion of the continent at guarded by the Germans, but along the more vul. | cener 
a moment when it may be forced to take the initia- nerable coastline of Italy. Such plans have been io 
tive on other fronts—either in the African theatre formulated on the theory that the Italians are pro. | pa 
of war, where renewed skirmishes on land and sea foundly dissatisfied with the course of the war, and | secur 
have been reported, or in the Near and Middle East, might revolt against the Fascist government if they | inter 
where the British are preparing to collaborate with were assured of British aid. While there is no doubt | oress: 
the Russians in defense of the Caucasus, whose oil that Italy is being subjected to increasing economic | a 
resources are one of the main objectives of the Nazis’ restrictions, and that its industries—whose leaders fore 
Russian campaign. were reshuffled by Mussolini on October 25—are | exec: 

_ The British realize that, unless they take the ini- feeling the strain of a prolonged and so far fruit. the 1 
tiative against Germany, the movements of unrest less war, it would be difficult for the Italians to re. | gove 
on the continent, greatly strengthened, if not actu- volt as long as their country is dominated by the) a ple 
ally inspired, by Russia’s resistance, might prove to Germans. Judging by the negotiations conducted last } tober 
have been stillborn. The reprisals inflicted by the week in Rome by Dr. Funk, Reich Minister of Eco-| were 
Germans in Nantes and Bordeaux last week demon- nomics, the Nazis are seeking to keep Italy satisfied | supp 
strate the inequality of the struggle between un- by promising it a rdle of leadership in the Mediter-! enfo 
armed civilians, no matter how heroic, and an occu- ranean once the war is over. From the Italian point | prob 
pying power which has at its command not only of view, however, Mediterranean leadership in al surfi 
an armed force, but the services of a secret police Europe ruled by Germany may prove less satisfactory) whic 
equipped with all the weapons of modern terrorism. than the rdle Italy played when Britain and France} wint 
The denunciations of German executions by Presi- dominated that area. .Y" 
dent Roosevelt and Mr. Churchill on October 25, VERA MICHELES DEAN | thou 

TOJO CABINET MOBILIZES JAPAN FOR CRISIS = 
Despite the reported clash between Japanese and that Tokyo is still marking time may be seen in the 
Soviet patrols on the Manchurian border, the trend decision to summon an emergency session of the{ Re 
of events suggests that Japan is still marshaling its Diet on November 15. While it is possible that the) “™ 
forces before staking its future on a desperate mili- Diet might be convened to ratify a military fait! ‘% 
tary venture. Russian resistance to the German ar- accompli, it is more likely that the new Cabinet will} 5 
mies, especially on the Moscow fronts, shows no not undertake drastic action during the period before | fice! 
sign of that general collapse which might herald a the Diet assembles. te. 
Japanese drive into Siberia. The Tojo Cabinet has ) j situ 
thus far proved willing to continue negotiations with ao Supine of manent Se Seel with pee 
MAGE Geeta Te eeldenilp Uelloves thatthe «— % SORTS ond Enance supplies the cotensble Rl a 
te : Prge ses so for the calling of the extraordi s One 
threat which it offers in the Pacific will enhance the  *y 4 woeasreg Setar pla 
ey ; ffect of the curtailment of Japan’s foreign trade, | 
bargaining power of Japanese diplomacy, and it may : ; _ 24P gn +} coll 
; cd following the Anglo-American-Dutch freezing of 
hope that continuance of the negotiations will neu- B ime B ay | not 
tralize American opposition to an invasion of the popentts sets % Daly, bes Some pes. sem, et put 
es - burden on Japan’s economic resources. This| |; 
Soviet Far East. sn has also hag increased by th a ~ mo- | re 
ar aN a e stea 4 
SPECIAL DIET SESSION. Another indication bilization of large forces of additional troops ‘which 
has quietly proceeded throughout recent months. The} me 
AFRICA AND THE WORLD CONFLICT Diet will be asked to vote additional military & | ge, 
by Louis E. Frechtling penditures to cover the costs of this mobilization, hig 


October 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports . . . 25c per copy 


Foreign Policy Reports combine the highest standards 
of scholarship with the flexibility and timeliness of 
journalism. Published on the ist and 15th of each 
month. Subscription, $5 a year; to FPA members, $3. 











as well as to provide for the possibility of a large | 
scale war. Taxes will be raised by 600 to 700 mil 
lion yen, bringing total annual revenues to neatly 
6 billion yen (about $1,400,000,000). Expenditures} 
in the current budget—exclusive of supplementary 











= | — Page Three 


OE 























ake | Diet appropriations—already exceed 12 billion yen, 

are | with nearly 70 per cent allocated to war purposes. F.P.A. Radio Schedule 

ies, | Japan's national debt is approaching 35 billion yen Subject: ON THE LATIN AMERICAN FRONT 

aid | —a figure well above even the abnormally expanded Speaker: John I. B. McCulloch 

ied | national income of recent years. Date: Sunday, November 2 

ex | “The new goverment immediate appeal to the | Tie, t24zIS nm EST. cs NBC 

not} Diet is also motivated by political considerations. , J 

ind | Staffed mainly with bureaucrats and dominated by a 00 aneet Gn eel ws ; , 
ad ; ‘ . precedented crisis, he outlined Japan’s 

nul: } general inactive service holding three portfolios, the foreign policy in uncompromising terms. “The world 

een | Tojo Cabinet rests on a narrow political base. It ob- environment is changing so quickly,” he said, “we 

0 | viously hopes to strengthen its domestic position by cannot tell what lies in store Tor us any minute, but 


and | securing advance Diet ratification of its national and 
hey | international program, and particularly of its ag- 
ubt | gressive foreign policy. The official announcement 
mic } stated that the government planned to express be- 
lers 
are 


the empire stands solemnly on the national policy it 
has reiterated time and again. We must go on to 
develop in ever-expanding progression. There is no 
retreat.” 

While these statements are expressed in general 
terms, there can be little doubt that they reflect a 
growing threat of war in the Pacific. Emboldened by 
recent German advances in Russia, Japan is swiftly 
preparing to act on a favorable opportunity. Tokyo 

- obviously harbors the belief that it may still divide 
its opponents in the Far East by moving against 
them “one by one.” If its hand is to be stayed, the 
most unequivocal warning that further aggressive 





fore the Diet “its firm determination regarding the 
_ execution of national policies and, further, to have 
uit , the nation understand and cooperate with it [the 
fe- | government] through the Imperial Diet.” Following 
the | a plea for national unity from General Tojo on Oc- 
| tober 26, it was reported that some 300 deputies 

| were preparing to lay before the Diet a resolution 
fied} supporting the government and encouraging it to 
ter} enforce Japan’s national policy. The new Cabinet 














™ P ts cueunad be . ted - yey Ms moves will meet concerted Anglo-American-Soviet 
—" 2 . ee oe Se ae Opposition is required. 
ory; which were so apparent in the Diet session last Ppo 4 T. A. Bisson 
ince | winter. Errata 
WASHINGTON-TOKYO EXCHANGES. AIl- In the Argentine trade agreement article in the 
N | though several conferences between Japanese and October 24 issue of the Bulletin it was erroneously 
| American officials at Washington indicate that nego- __ stated that all concessions made by the United States 
| tiations are still continuing, neither side ventures Were subject to cancellation after the war. Actually, 
the | to suggest that prospects of agreement are favorable. this country will be able to withdraw concessions 
the { Recent statements by leading members of both gov- only on those products of which Argentina was a 
the} ¢fments, on the contrary, have tended to empha- secondary source of supply before the current war. 
fai size the gravity of the existing crisis. The article also errs in including fresh apples among 
will; Speaking informally before a group of naval of- the products on which the United States will cut 
fore) ficers and ordnance manufacturers in Washington its duties. 
' S October 24, Secretary Knox declared that the No Other Road to Freedom, by Leland Stowe. New York, 
situation in the Far East was “extremely strained.” Knopf, 1941. $3.00 
em | He continued: ‘We are satisfied in our minds that F hy ge account, a ——— ct emotion, of = 
rea- : . -s : itions in the conquered countries o urope, especially 
ne | the Jap mee have no intention of gving Up their Norway and Greece, by a correspondent of The Chicago 
4 plans for expansion. If they pursue that course, a Daily News, who was once an isolationist but now urges 
, | collision there is inevitable. It can occur at very short intervention by the United States. 
‘i notice.” Writing in The Army ana Navy Journal for Hitler Cannot Conquer Russia, by Maurice Hindus. New 
st | publication on October 25, the Secretary of the Navy York, DUNS Seen Seu, eee 
his | likened the Ori ca ode The author, well-known for his penetrating sketches of 
mo} .: ane e Orient to a vast powder- eg—poten- peasant life under the Soviets, asserts his belief that Russia 
ch tially ready to explode with a roar that will be heard will ultimately defeat Hitler with the twin weapons of 
uc all across the Pacific.” As if in answer to these state- guerrilla warfare and revolutionary ideas. 
7 ments, General Tojo delivered an equally emphatic oe a get A gees by Sven Hedin. New 
. . ork, John Day, . $4. 
ion, / epeaticn = October 26 before wh, atin. of 200 Reminiscences of Sven Hedin, woven into a rather 
a igh officials in Osaka. Asking for ‘‘iron solidarity sketchy biography of Chiang Kai-shek. 





mil- | FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 2, OcroBsr 31, 1941. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 
arly Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; ‘DororHy F. Lxgt, Secretary; Vera MICHELES Dxan, Edstor. 
Be Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 
1 , ey : ; 

S181 Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
taty F, P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 











Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Oct. 27.—The drive for revision of the Neutrality 
Act took an unexpected turn last week when Con- 
gressional leaders reversed their strategy of piece- 
meal amendment and moved for repeal of all re- 
maining provisions of the law which hamper the 
Administration in carrying out its fundamental 
foreign policy. Disclosure of the new strategy came 
on October 25 from the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, which reported by a vote of 13 to 10 a 
measure to authorize the arming of merchant ships 
and permit American vessels to pass through combat 
zones and deliver war supplies to belligerent ports. 

THE TIDE TURNS. The action of the Senate 
Committee followed a series of political develop- 
ments which gave the initiative to a group of Re- 
publicans supporting the foreign policy views of 
Wendell L. Willkie, and which promised to bring 
about a far-reaching realignment on Capitol Hill. 
The story of these developments may be summed up 
briefly as follows: 

On October 9 President Roosevelt followed the 
cautious advice of Congressional leaders when he 
sent a special message to Congress asking for the 
arming of merchant ships but not requesting im- 
mediate action on other sections of the Neutrality 
Act. On October 17 the House approved the arming 
of American merchantmen by the surprising major- 
ity of 259 to 138, thus suggesting that Congress 
might be in the mood to support outright repeal. 
Despite this apparent turn in the tide of Congres- 
sional opinion the President’s advisers, fearing the 
consequences of a bitter and protracted debate, con- 
tinued to recommend caution and urged the White 
House to avoid a showdown on the larger issue. 

At this stage, the active intervention of Mr. 
Willkie introduced a new element in the Congres- 
sional picture. On October 21 Mr. Willkie called on 
Republican members of Congress to repeal the en- 
tire Neutrality Act as a “hypocritical” law which 
was now helping the Axis by obstructing aid to 
Britain. The Willkie statement, signed by 100 lead- 
ing Republicans, urged the immediate adoption of 
a “forthright, direct international policy, designed 
to encompass the destruction of totalitarianism by 
whatever means necessary.’’ In Washington this out- 
spoken declaration gave added impetus to a repeal 
resolution previously introduced in the Senate by 
three Willkie supporters—Senators Austin of Ver- 
mont, Bridges of New Hampshire, and Gurney of 


North Dakota. Believing that the Willkie Repubj 
cans had judged the temper of Congress more a 
curately than Administration leaders, three Demo 
crats—Senators Pepper of Florida, Green of Rhod 
Island, and Lee of Oklahoma—promptly launche 
a parallel move to wipe out the war zone restrictions 
in the present law. 

Faced with increasing pressure from both groups, 
Administration strategists took a hurried poll of th 
Foreign Relations Committee and decided to risk ; 
decision on the basic issue of repeal. The first vote 
in the Committee was 12 to 11 in favor of repeal 
but when the motion was made to report the amend 
ed resolution, Senator White of Maine reversed his 
vote, making the final ballot 13 to 10. As reported 
to the Senate, the amended resolution called for ref 
peal of Sections 2, 3 and 6 of the Neutrality Ad 
leaving intact only those provisions which deal with 
control of the export of arms and ammunition, travel 
by American citizens on belligerent vessels, and other 
minor matters within the discretion of the Presi} 
dent. In effect, therefore, the committee action repre} 
sented a complete victory for the advocates of te 
peal and gave President Roosevelt a measure which 
fulfilled his personal desires more completely than) 
the original measure. 

It would be a mistake to assume that the Presi-| 
dent will have clear sailing in all future tests with 
Congress. Mr. Roosevelt's isolationist critics are; 
continuing their fight on the Senate floor, charging} 
that the Committee resolution is another, and pos 
sibly “final,” step toward war. And Administration) 
spokesmen admit that the debate may run for at” 
least a week or ten days. Nevertheless, most Wash-\ 
ington observers are convinced that the Senate will| 
pass the bill without important changes, perhaps by} 
a substantial majority, and that the House will then! 
accept the Senate version. 

Should this forecast be accurate, the intervention’ 
of the “Willkie Republicans” may prove to have} 
been the turning point. For if the Republicans adopt! 
the formula offered by Mr. Willkie, the opposition| 
party in Congress will cease to be a deterrent to ac 
tion, and may become the chief critic of Executive! 
performance. The sharper tone of President Roose 
velt’s Navy Day Speech, declaring that ‘the shooting } 
has started,” may be in part a reflection of this shift 
of sentiment in Congress. The ultimate effect of the 
shift will be shown in the future course of American} 
relations. 


W. T. STONE 














—— 
VOL. 
— 


prof 
beic 
yet 

accc 
of ( 
beet 
botl 
of I 
far- 


erst 
ma! 


ced 
ocl 
ro 
n 

ally 


oo = 


vis. 


see 


