.s 


rae 





S|. 
nt 
rj. 


14s 
the 
lis- 


his 


for 
fer 
ind 
ore 
ave 
ng- 
ing 
any 
om 


vith 
ead 





ral | 
lan: | 
red | 


ine, 


ek, 


cles 
hile 
cely 


(0 
5 tO 
of 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation of current international events by the Research Staff 
Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





You. XIX, No. 11 JANUARY 5, 1940 





THE F.P.A. IS ON THE AIR 


every Sunday from 3:15 to 3:30 E.S.T., over WJZ and the 
Blue Network of the National Broadcasting Company, in a series 
entitled ‘America Looks Abroad.”” We are eager to have com- 
ments on the program from F.P.A. members and their friends. 

If you have not been able to hear the broadcasts, please 
urge your local station to carry them. 


William T. Stone will speak on January 7th 





Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
Ap 29 4 N. Y., under the act 

| ee of March 3, 1879. 




















POLITICAL BALANCE SHEET OF EUROPEAN WAR 


ne 





eg as it may seem, much of Europe 
entered 1940 with a somewhat less heavy heart 
than 1939. Actual danger, grim though it is, has 
proved easier to bear than that nerve-wracking an- 
ticipation of disaster which had effectively aided 
Hitler's conquests of Austria and Czechoslovakia. 
Costly as the war has already been in terms of wealth 
—if not yet, fortunately, in terms of human lives— 
ithas also served to clarify many issues which had 
appeared hopelessly confused, and to dispel many 
pre-war assumptions about its character and course. 

THE SOVIET-GERMAN EQUATION. In the 
perspective of four months the Soviet-German pact 
of non-aggression remains the most far-reaching de- 
velopment of the conflict. It disillusioned both those 
conservatives who had regarded Nazism as a bul- 
wark against Communism, and those “friends” of 
the Soviet Union who had done Moscow the great 
disservice of claiming for it the attributes of Utopia. 
By that same token, it rallied many erstwhile Nazi 
and Soviet “‘fellow-travelers” to the support of a 
sort of reformist democracy, which might combine 
democratic institutions with some of the social and 
economic ideas developed in Germany and the So- 
viet Union. This sudden expansion of “center” 
opinion in Western countries at the expense of Right 
and Left extremism may—provided it does not de- 
generate into blind reaction—pave the way for a 
tevival of democracy, reinterpreted in twentieth- 
century terms. Such a revival may coincide with a 
tenewed popular interest in religion, accompanied 
by simultaneous recognition on the part of religious 
leaders of their responsibility for social and economic 
welfare. 

Not only has the Soviet-German pact brought an 
unforeseen accretion of unity to the Western coun- 
tries; it has also proved less fruitful for Germany 
and the Soviet Union than these two countries, each 


according to its needs, had anticipated in August. 
During the first six weeks of the war Moscow di- 
rectly benefited from Hitler’s preoccupation with 
the conflict in the West, which he had hoped that 
the Soviet pact would prevent. This interval per- 
mitted the Soviet government to strengthen its de- 
fense position against future invasion by Germany, 
with or without Allied assistance, by acquiring Po- 
lish territory and establishing air and naval bases in 
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. It also raised Ger- 
many’s hopes that it might obtain in the U.S.S.R. 
sufficient stocks of foodstuffs and raw materials to 
counteract the effects of Britain’s naval blockade. 
Soviet invasion of Finland, however, played havoc 
with both Soviet and German plans. This invasion 
dispelled any remaining doubts in the West regard- 
ing the scope of Moscow’s territorial aspirations; 
and revealed the inadequacy of the Soviet army, both 
as a carrier of revolutionary doctrines and a poten- 
tial ally of Germany. The successful resistance of the 
Finns, who on December 30, in the battle of Lake 
Kianta, repelled a fresh Russian attack launched 
by the recently appointed General Stern, gave new 
courage to countries which fear they are next on 
Stalin’s list. Typical of this reaction was the state- 
ment by Premier George Tatarescu on January 1 
that Rumania will defend Bessarabia (former Rus- 
sian province) and Bukovina (former province of 
the Austro-Hungarian Empire) “to the last man” 
against foreign invasion. And while the increasing 
difficulties of the Finnish campaign may make the 
Soviet government more dependent than before on 
Germany, they have also curtailed its ability to sup- 
ply the Reich with foodstuffs and raw materials. 
1940 PROSPECTS ON THE WESTERN FRONT. 
The military reverses suffered by Soviet troops in 
Finland, however, may not prove decisive either for 
Moscow’s Finnish campaign or for the future pros- 


























pects of Communism in Eastern Europe. Skillful 
as the Finns have been in their utilization of terrain 
and war material, their resources of man power are 
strictly limited; and the aid extended to them thus 
far by other states in the form of volunteers, money, 
airplanes, guns and ammunition may not prove suf- 
ficient to withstand the sheer weight of Soviet mass 
armies. The Allies are faced in the New Year with 
the alternative of either diverting men, as well as 
supplies, to the aid of Finland, thus becoming in- 
volved in war with the Soviet Union—an eventuality 
which might not be displeasing to Hitler; or else 
concentrating their efforts on a decisive blow against 
the Reich, abandoning Finland, temporarily at least, 
to Stalin’s mercies. 

The dilemma of the Allies is complicated by re- 
ports that in the spring the Reich will utilize mines, 
airplanes, and a new fleet of “‘vest-pocket” sub- 
marines, in an effort to cripple the British navy which 
so far, in spite of heavy losses, has succeeded in 
enforcing a strict blockade of Germany and in main- 
taining Britain’s “life-line’” with the rest of the 
world. A fierce counter-offensive such as “the world 
has never known” against the Allied blockade was 
predicted by Field Marshal Goering on December 
30; while Chancellor Hitler, in his New Year's 
message, declared that the “heaviest battle is still 
to come” in a war which, according to him, is fought 
by Germany for the purpose of establishing the “‘so- 
cialist millenium” in Europe by revolution against 
the Western democracies and “Jewish” capitalism. 


THE OUTLOOK IN THE BALKANS. The 


Page Two 








—$— 


Balkan countries, which may develop into anothe 
theatre of war in 1940, continue to be torn by the 
conflicting aims of the vatious belligerents. Italy 
disturbed by the Soviet-German pact, is seeking 4 
pretext for an intervention in the Balkans whic 
might check Soviet expansion in that region. Such , 
pretext might be provided, as in Spain, by real oy 
alleged Communist activities. The sudden epidemic 
of Communist riots in Yugoslavia may be the firs 
fruits of Soviet penetration in the Balkans; but it js 
not impossible that the drastic anti-Communis 
measures adopted by the Belgrade government are 
dictated less by dread of Communism than by fear 
that Italy might intervene under the slogan of “say. 
ing Yugoslavia from Bolshevism.” That the Slay 
peoples of the Balkans may yet turn to the Soviet 
Union for support is indicated by the decision of 
Bulgaria to send a trade mission to Moscow. 
Italy apparently hopes to enlist the support of the 
Vatican for the campaign it is gradually shaping up 
against Communism in the Balkans. The rapproche. 
ment between Church and State was marked, on 
December 28, by the Pope’s return visit to the King 
and Queen of Italy—the first visit paid by a Pontiff 
to the Quirinal since termination of the Vatican's 
temporal powers in 1870. But while Mussolini prob- 
ably shares the Pope’s desire to restore peace in 
Europe and check Soviet expansion, it may be 
doubted that he is ready to accept the Pontiff’s five 
point peace program, or abandon his hope for ter. 
ritorial gains in Africa at the expense of France. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


THE WAR ON THE ECONOMIC FRONT 


With actual fighting restricted to comparatively 
modest naval and air operations, the Western Euro- 
pean belligerents are still concentrating most of their 
attention on economic warfare. In this field Britain 
has recently won several victories. Seeking to divert 
the trade of neutral Europe from Germany, the 
British government concluded commercial agree- 
ments with Sweden, Yugoslavia, Greece and Turkey. 


DIVERTING SUPPLIES FROM GERMANY. 
The accord with Sweden, signed on December 27, 
apparently includes a Swedish undertaking not to 
permit the re-exportation of goods imported from 
overseas countries, and provides for a mutual in- 
crease in trade which may prove prejudicial to Ger- 
many. It is not known, however, whether Sweden 
has consented to sell Britain a larger proportion of 
its iron ore output at the expense of the Reich. Of 
the other agreements, all announced on December 
29, that with Yugoslavia is the most serious blow 
to Germany. The Reich’s trade with Turkey and 
Greece had already declined substantially following 
the interruption of communications by sea and Tur- 


key’s political alignment with the Allies. From 


Yugoslavia, however, Germany had hoped to ob | 


tain larger quantities of copper, lead and other ores, 
Now Belgrade has undertaken to ship more of these 
metals to Britain and France, with the proviso that 
the two countries also take its exportable surplus of 
prunes. Turkey has agreed to sell the Allies its sup- 
plies of chromium in return for their promise 
buy such non-essentials as figs and grapes. While 
the accord with Greece covers no vital war materials, 
another agreement which has virtually been con 
cluded with Spain will insure the Allies that coun- 
try’s important supplies of iron ore, lead, copper and 
sulphur pyrites, and mercury. 


RUMANIAN OIL FOR THE REICH. Germany’ 
only recent commercial success was the treaty signed 
on December 20 with Rumania. In this accord Ru 
mania accepted a rise in the exchange rate of the 
German mark from 41.5 to 49 lei, which increases 
the Reich’s purchasing power in the Rumanian mat 
ket, and agreed to provide Germany with a mint 
mum of 130,000 metric tons of oil per month a 





Belt 


or 


> 
well ¢ 
remai 
many 
mania 
to fal 
no m<¢ 
ne: 
thoug 
Germ 
in ex 
short 
gasoli 
Th 
ever, 
and 
Germ 
bettet 
drasti 
assur 
time 
omy 
little 
fougl 
able 
ploye 
to m: 
Gern 
pean 
the I 
been 
off ¢ 
ticul. 
ally, 
only 


Tl 
man’ 
sour 
grea 
sure 
brou 
appr 
Ing 
help 
prov 
been 
reco 
recer 
fran 


| ginn 


raise 
sum 
cour 
Ir 
but 


FORE 
Headc 


Entere 


@ 





Fe i 


Soll 
—_— 
== 


~-VUW 
cs 


ich 
ha 


‘a 3 Be 


nist 
are 
eat 
ay. 
lay 
viet 

of 


the 
he. 
ing 


tiff 


in § 


ive: 
ter- 


int 





Batt Set 








& @ J 

gell as to expedite delivery of 260,000 tons which 
remain due under a previous agreement. For Ger- 
many the value of this treaty is problematic. Ru- 
mania has already cancelled in part its undertaking 
to raise the exchange rate of the mark, and it is by 
no means certain that the transportation difficulties 
impeding the delivery of oil can be overcome. Al- 
though the total amount of oil to be shipped to 
Germany during 1940—1,820,000 metric tons—is 
in excess Of exports last year, it will still fall far 
short of covering the Reich’s critical deficiency in 
gasoline once war begins on an extensive scale. 

The Nazi government can derive comfort, how- 
ever, from the fact that its totalitarian state apparatus 
and careful economic preparations have enabled 
Germany to conserve its resources and supplies much 
better than in the last war. With the help of a 
drastic system of rationing, the Reich appears to be 
assured of a fairly adequate food supply for a long 
time to come. The transition of the German econ- 
omy to a war basis has been accomplished with 
little friction and waste. Since the war has been 
fought on a modest scale, the government has been 
able to keep a very large proportion of men em- 
ployed in factories and on farms, where they help 
to maintain production and exports. On the whole, 
Germany has kept up its shipments to neutral Euro- 
pean countries remarkably well. Unfortunately for 
the Reich, a considerable part of its exports have 
been used, under pressure from the neutrals, to pay 
off existing commercial indebtedness. This is par- 
ticularly true of trade with Germany’s ostensible 
ally, Italy, which is permitting sales to the Reich 
only against cash in foreign exchange. 

THE BURDEN ON THE ALLIES. While Ger- 
many is trying to make the best of its slender re- 
sources, the Allies also face a period in which ever 
greater economic sacrifices will be necessary to in- 
sure victory. The financial burden of the war was 
brought home to France at the year’s end with the 
approval of the 1940 budget. The civil budget, call- 
ing for 79 billion francs, will be balanced with the 
help of new taxation. For war expenditures a 
provisional appropriation of 249 billion francs has 


been authorized. While French economic life has 


recovered in large measure from the weaknesses of 
fecent years and capital to the value of 34 billion 
francs is said to have been repatriated since the be- 
ginning of the war, it is doubtful that France can 
faise its war budget without resort to inflation. The 
sum required is in itself almost equivalent to the 
country’s entire national income during 1939. 

In Britain the fiscal year expires only on March 31, 
but Sir John Simon told the House of Commons 


Page Three 





TS 
—ee 





last November that the government was already 
spending money at the rate of £2,400 million per year 
and the most conservative experts estimate expendi- 
ture for 1940-1941 well above this sum. It has al- 
ready become evident that the lower income groups 
will have to bear a large part of the burden, for 
even if all incomes over £2,000 were confiscated and 
the tax rate on those over £250 were raised, there 
would still be a sizable deficit. For the coming fiscal 
year the basic income tax rate will be 37.5 per cent, 
and the exemptions are exceedingly low. 

FRANCO-BRITISH FINANCIAL COOPERA- 
TION. The Allies, however, have not only the ad- 
vantage of incomparably greater economic reserves, 
but can share the sacrifices equitably. This was strik- 
ingly illustrated once more on December 12 when 
they concluded an agreement for financial coopera- 
tion supplementing their general economic accord 
of November 17. The two countries have under- 
taken to keep exchange rates fixed at 176.5 francs 
to the pound and to pool, in effect, their extensive 
foreign assets. Neither will raise any foreign loan 
or credit without the consent of the other and 
France and Britain will share, on a 40:60 basis; the 
burden of any financial assistance to other countries 
or governments, such as Poland. Their Finance Min- 
isters will also consult on price policies. 

Financial coordination confronts the Allies in 
practice with serious problems. France, for example, 
has adopted measures providing for drastic control 
of prices and wages. No prices can be raised with- 
out the consent of the government, and wages have 
been stabilized at pre-war levels and even reduced. 
French wage earners are now getting the same pay 
for 45 hours which they formerly received for 40 
hours, and compensation for overtime has been re- 
duced 40 per cent below the rate prevailing for 
regular hours. In Britain, on the other hand, wages 
and prices have continued to rise despite warnings 
from reputable critics like Keynes that such a 
course could end only in inflation. In the first three 
months of the war wholesale prices rose 24 per cent 
and the cost of living almost 11 per cent. Under 
the pressure of trade unions many wage increases 
have been accorded. This situation will have to be 
remedied if financial cooperation between the Allies 
is to succeed and dissatisfaction among French 
workers, with their disproportionately heavy sacri- 
fices, is to be avoided. 

All belligerent countries inevitably face the necessity 
of lowering living standards as the price of victory. 
The war will not only bring about greater poverty, but 
an economic levelling which may well be tantamount 
to a major social revolution. JOHN C. DEWILDE 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XIX, No. 11, January 5, 1940. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


Nationa 


Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Laer, Secretary; Vera Micuzres Dran, Béitor. 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


> 181 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








| 
; 


Washington News Letter 














WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


JAN. 3.—With the approach of January 26, when 
the Japanese-American commercial treaty expires, 
all indications of the probable trend of American 
policy toward Japan are being carefully scanned. 
As yet there is little tangible evidence regarding 
the moves which may be under consideration by the 
Washington authorities after the treaty lapses. The 
diplomatic jockeying at Tokyo and Washington dur- 
ing the past few weeks, however, has given rise to 
some interesting—and perhaps revealing—episodes. 


TRADE REPRISALS AGAINST JAPAN? A 
circular letter issued on December 21 by Basil Harris, 
Commissioner of Customs, eliminated the possibility 
that a 10 per cent ad valorem duty on imports from 
Japan carried in Japanese vessels might be automati- 
cally imposed after January 26. The Commissioner 
noted that in 1828 Congress had enacted a law im- 
posing a 10 per cent tax on imports carried in for- 
eign bottoms, but that President Grant had sus- 
pended such duties against Japan in 1872. As the 
circular letter was designed to reassure importers, 
it was apparent that the Treasury Department did 
not intend to reimpose this tonnage tax against 
Japan in the near future. A broader implication 
would be that immediate reprisals against Japanese 
trade, at least to the extent that these could be 
taken by action of the Executive, are not envisaged. 
If such is the case, it might serve to explain the un- 
expected (and otherwise unreasoned) jubilation in 
Japanese diplomatic circles just before the Christmas 
week-end. 

Reports from Tokyo at that time stressed Japanese 
satisfaction over certain unrevealed American “‘con- 
cessions” to Japan, supposedly made by Ambassador 
Grew in his conversations with Admiral Nomura, 
Japanese Foreign Minister. Newspapers in Japan 
even quoted Ambassador Grew as saying to the 
Foreign Minister that the American government 
would “take steps at an early opportunity to insure 
that trade relations between the two countries will 
continue to be carried on without hindrance.’’ The 
story was played up in such a way as to give the 
Japanese public the impression that Mr. Grew’s as- 
surances were in response to the Japanese govern- 
ment’s previous action in promising to open the 
Yangtze River to Nanking under certain restric- 
tions at some future date. At the same time, news 
of the circular letter issued by the Customs Com- 
missioner was garbled in such a way as to convey 


the impression that the Treasury Department had 
officially stated that there would be no trade dis. 
crimination against Japan. The net result of this 
method of handling news within Japan undoubtedly 
strengthened the position of the Abe Cabinet, which 
was then facing its preliminary test before the Die, 
under adverse circumstances. 

In Washington, meanwhile, Secretary Hull de 
clared in press conference that the State Depart. 
ment had no details to communicate on the Grey. 
Nomura conversations, save that they were being 
carried on. While no official denial of the Japanese 
press reports was made by Washington, semi-official 
statements indicated that trade would continue ip 
an “uncertain state” after the treaty expires, until 
Japan showed itself willing to grant ‘‘major United 
States demands.” It was significant, perhaps, that in 
these statements also there was no hint of immedi- 
ate trade reprisals against Japan after January 26, 


The broader issue of a Congressional embargo on 
American exports to Japan was brought to the fore 


on December 30, when Senator Pittman, chairman | 


of the Foreign Relations Committee, issued a formal 
statement. Between the lines of this statement, some 


observers noted a partial weakening of his earlier | 


forthright advocacy of embargo action. He expressed 
doubt that Japan had undertaken to call a halt to 
violations of American rights in China, and indicated 
that he would urge the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee “at the proper time’’ to approve his 
embargo resolution. In conclusion, he took note of 
the Japanese-American conversations at Tokyo, and 
expressed the hope that Japan ‘‘will carry out her 
pledges and that further action by Congress will be 
unnecessary. 

Washington circles were also watching with keen 
interest the progress of negotiations between Japan 
and the Soviet Union. On December 31 Moscow and 
Tokyo announced agreements by which Manchoukuo 
undertook to meet the final payment on the Chinese 
Eastern Railway at once, while the USSR. ex 
tended the Soviet-Japanese fisheries agreement for 
another year. Still more important was the statement 
that negotiations for a long-term fisheries conven- 
tion would be conducted during 1940. Preliminary 
meetings of the commission set up to delimit the 
Outer Mongolia-Manchoukuo frontiers have been 
held, and final agreement on this issue is expected 
to be reached at further sessions. Negotiations for a 
comprehensive Soviet-Japanese trade agreement are 
being initiated at Moscow. T. A. Bisson 








to: 








