


iral 


ief, 
JA? 


pre- 
m.* 
the 
BOv- 
rom 
e is 
glas 

his 
| on 


ruer- 
ated 
e fe- 
; of 
e of 
nent 


iilip- 
ES 


lems,” 


ae 





nov 8 


ar, Entered as 2nd class matter 
. pir Bish 
+ ICAL KVUM Uni a) : 
; ARY Versit ; 
2 Vv et aicu. 4 4 Nichiga 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 








An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 





in. XXIV, No. 3 


NoveMBER 8, 1944 





BY offering its platform to President Roosevelt and 
Governor Dewey for presentation of their views 
m this country’s foreign policy, the Foreign Policy 
Association—a nonpartisan organization represent- 
ing all shades of political opinion—believes it has 
fulfilled its objective which, as stated in its consti- 
tution, “is to carry on research and educational ac- 
tivities in the understanding and constructive devel- 
fopment of American foreign policy.” President 
Roosevelt accepted the invitation of the Association, 
while Governor Dewey decided to state his views, 
already presented in Louisville on September 8, at 
the Herald Tribune Forum on October 18, and again 
—this time in answer to the President—in Min- 
neapolis on October 24. Meanwhile, members of the 
Association in branch cities have had an opportunity 
tohear other Republican spokesmen. In each instance 
the Association, as has been its practice during the 
twenty-six years of its existence, has made no attempt 
tither to support or censor the views expressed by 
the speakers. To have done so would, obviously, have 
deen to violate the American tradition of free speech, 
which applies to every citizen, whatever his rank. 


ISSUES STILL UNDER DISCUSSION. The en- 
suing debate has done much “‘to aid in the under- 
standing and constructive development of American 
foreign policy.” Both Presidential candidates have 
affirmed their determination to support an interna- 
tional organization, and to prevent attempts to render 
it ineffective once it has been established. In fact, 
there is today no responsible person speaking for 
tither party who would go on record as opposing in- 
ternational collaboration. This, in itself, is a recog- 
nition of the deep and genuine anxiety felt by the 
American people concerning problems of national 
Security, and can be considered a marked improve- 
Ment over the partisan bickering over “Wilson's 
League’ that prevailed during the 1920 campaign. 
There are three main issues, however, which continue 











WILL ELECTIONS RESULT IN GREATER INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION? - 


to trouble conscientious voters. 


1. REVIVAL OF ISOLATIONISM. The first of 
these is the indubitable revival of isolationist senti- 
ment. Those of us who live on the eastern seaboard 
tend to indulge in the pleasant illusion that isolation- 
ism is dead, and will not rise again to plague the 
makers of post-war foreign policy. Even a brief con- 
tact with the Middle West, however, should dispel 
that illusion. There, in several prominent news- 
papers, cynical attacks on the Dumbarton Oaks docu- 
ment go hand in hand with unremitting criticism of 
Britain and with hostile insinuations about Russia. 
Anti-Russian sentiment is coupled with aspersions 
on the Political Action Committee, described as a 
tool of Stalin, and with open attacks on the “foreign- 
born” (a term made to appear synonymous with 
Communist) —this in spite of the fact that few areas 
of the United States are so thickly settled by persons 
of non-Anglo-Saxon origin as Wisconsin, Minnesota, 
and Chicago, with its large Polish and Italian popu- 
lation. 

2. ATTITUDE OF CONGRESS. Were this re- 
vival of isolationism merely a local phenomenon, 
which would leave the formulation of national pol- 
icy unaffected, it might be dismissed as the inevitable 
reaction of some of our citizens who live in areas 
remote from both Europe and Asia. The fact, how- 
ever, that strong isolationist elements are already 
represented in Congress, which under the constitu- 
tion participates in the making of foreign policy, has 
a direct bearing on the issue now before the voter. 
Unless, as Senator Ball has urged, the isolationist 
elements can be defeated in elections for Congress, 
either of the Presidential candidates will be faced 
with the same problem—that of obtaining the sup- 
port of Congress for effective participation by the 
United States in the international organization 
backed by both parties. This problem will not neces- 
sarily prove easier for Mr. Dewey than for Mr. 





: 
ies serene apenas Se ae 


i a ee 


l 
| 
) 








; 
rt 
Ld 
rf 














Roosevelt. For while the next House may be Repub- 
lican, the Senate, which ratifies treaties, is more 
likely to have a Democratic than a Republican ma- 
jority. The Republicans contend that Mr. Roosevelt, 
who in the past has had many clashes with Congress, 
will prove unable to obtain its collaboration on for- 
eign policy, and will be opposed not only by Repub- 
licans, but also by anti-Administration Democrats. 
The Democrats, for their part, raise the question 
whether Mz. Dewey will have the zeal and deter- 
mination to press for Congressional support of a 
United Nations organization when confronted with 
strongly entrenched isolationist elements of his own 
party who have shown no signs of a fundamental 
change of heart. The attitude of Congress assumes 
paramount importance in view of the fact that it is 
Congress which will have to grant authority to the 
American delegate on the proposed Security Council 
of the United Nations organization to act in an emer- 
gency calling for the use of force. Both Presidential 
candidates have stated that Congress must decide on 
this point. 

3. “SECRET DIPLOMACY.” One of the chief 
criticisms made of the Administration's foreign pol- 
icy during the campaign has been that the President 
engages in secret personal diplomacy, sending per- 
sonal agents abroad, setting up new agencies to deal 
with various aspects of international affairs, and by- 
passing the State Department. Under the constitu- 
tion the President has the power, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties; 
and to nominate and, by and with the advice of the 
Senate, appoint ambassadors, other public ministers 
and consuls. A President only slightly concerned with 
foreign affairs could make minimum use of these 

wers, while a President profoundly interested in 
that field could expand them to a maximum. It is 
natural that, in time of war, when foreign policy is 
no longer a matter of academic interest but a matter 
of life and death to every citizen, the President in 
office should want to participate more actively in its 
formulation than he might be inclined to do in time 
of peace: this was just as true of Woodrow Wilson 
in World War I as it has proved true of Franklin 
D. Roosevelt in World War II. The criticism could 
be justly made that Mr. Roosevelt has been lax in 
consulting his cabinet as a body on problems of 


Page Two 








— 
world affairs. At the same time, it must be admitted 
that the manifold exigencies of a global war, anj 
the vastly increased diplomatic activities of the 
United States have expanded far beyond the capag. 
ties of the State Department as originally set yp 
The Executive is, and will continue to be, faced with 
the alternative of either thoroughly reorganizing the | 
State Department so that it can act not only in the 
field of diplomacy but also in the many new technical 
fields involving international action, or of establish. 
ing new agencies to fulfill special functions for whic 
the State Department is at present not adapted. 


When judging the record of any administration ig 


foreign policy, we must bear in mind that the Ex } 


ecutive, in advancing this country’s interests, mus | 
inevitably reach compromises with other nations 

each of which is also pursuing its own interests— 
compromises which may again and again fall shor | 
of our ideals. To assume that on every occasion the 
United States will achieve its objectives one hundred 
per cent is to assume that we can follow a lone-hand 
policy—and yet obtain the acquiescence of all other 
countries in whatever we propose to do. This js 
clearly impossible. When it comes to responsibility, 








the President is directly accountable to the voters— 


as he will be on November 7—in a way not pate 
lelled in the case of the State Department, com | 


posed of appointed, not elected, officials. It is 
doubtful that any future President will want to with 
draw from direct participation in the making of for 
eign policy; and even more doubtful that he would 
escape the public criticisms which, in this country, ate 
invariably the lot of incumbents in office. 

The central fact of the campaign debate is that 
the United States, since 1914, has been effecting 
transition in foreign affairs from the stage of adoles 








cence to that of maturity. This is admittedly a pain 
ful transition, and mistakes have been made in the 
process by all who have been engaged in the 
formulation of foreign policy. By the time this war | 
is over, the world we live in will have been changel 
beyond even our present imagining. A bold imagine 
tion, and courage to face new situations without dis 
may, will be the prime requisites of statesmanship. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


(This is the second of two articles.) 


STILWELL RECALL OBLIGES U.S. TO REVIEW POLICY ON CHINA 


The recall of General Stilwell from his command 
in the China-Burma-India theatre and from his post 
as chief of staff to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek 
reflects the difficult military and political situation 
inside China, where the Japanese have made im- 

rtant advances in recent months. At the same time 
the historic defeat suffered by the Japanese Navy dur- 
ing October 22-27, when it lost 24 warships (includ- 
ing four carriers and two battleships) in the Second 





Battle of the Philippine Sea and suffered damage t0 
34 other vessels, is symbolic of the war in the Pacific, 
where things are going badly for the enemy. The 
military effort against Japan is being fought with two 
arms: the left—on the continent of Asia—is weak 
and battered; the right is delivering mighty blow 
in the Pacific area and is gaining in power every day. 
Although there is no question as to the ability of the 
United Nations to defeat Japan in the long mi 











=~ fA aos 1 A. Rr. wn FS CT? OH 


i ae a et 6h Ce 6 





td 








nage t0 
Pacific, 
yy. The 
ith two 
s weak 
» blows 
ery day. 
y of the 
ng fui, 








——— 
—_— 





this uneven situation is dangerous, and it would help 
matters a great deal if the left arm in China and 
India could be strengthened. 

AMERICA’S TWOFOLD POLICY. Stilwell’s 
withdrawal, as announced from Washington on 
October 28, is part of the developing crisis in China, 
a crisis which inevitably has repercussions in Chinese- 
American relations. The United States naturally has 
not been able to overlook the serious shortcomings 
of China’s war effort or the presence in high circles 
of obstructionists, such as War Minister Ho Ying- 
chin. Unquestionably many of China’s weaknesses 
have arisen from the length of the war and the 
stringency of the Japanese blockade, but resistance to 
Japan could be far more effective if Chungking were 
willing to join in genuine political cooperation with 
other groups, to carry through essential military and 
economic reforms, and abandon the idea of some day 
engaging in a new civil war against internal rivals. 

It is no secret that while General Stilwell sought 
to bring a maximum of military aid into China 
and stressed the need for opening a land route be- 
tween India and China, he was extremely careful 
to distribute supplies in a fashion guaranteeing their 
use against Japan. He most emphatically did not 
wish to see American aid used by Chinese groups or 
individuals in an internal political struggle. It also 
is clear that the United States Army has regretted 
a situation in which help could not be given to 
China’s fighting guerrillas because of disunity be- 
tween Chungking and the Eighteenth Group and 
New Fourth Armies. 

DIPLOMATIC QUESTIONS. Internationally 
speaking, the United States has taken the lead in 
bolstering the prestige of the Chungking govern- 
ment, and it is largely because of this country’s ef- 
forts that China has been included in the top leader- 
ship of the United Nations. But, aware of the serious 
discrepancy between China’s real strength and the 
diplomatic position recently accorded that country, 
Washington has sought to promote Chinese unity 
and the development of greater internal strength, 
so that China may ultimately join the Big Three in 
fact as well as in name. 

America’s purpose in backing Chungking has been 
to buttress the war effort against Japan, help the 
Chinese to become effective partners in the post-war 
Far East, and aid them in developing a large-internal 
market which would be of value to the American 
economy. The alternative would be a weak China, 
emerging from the war exhausted, incapable of con- 
tributing to the maintenance of peace in the Far 


Page Three 














East because of its own internal divisions, and pos- 
sessing little importance as a market except for those 
interested in selling military supplies to opposing 
factions for purposes of civil war. A progressive and. 
strong China could play a major role in the post-war 
world. A weak and disunited China might prove an 
apple of discord among its allies. Certainly there 
would be far less possibility of conflict between the 
United States, the U.S.S.R. and Britain over Chinese 
questions if there were a single Chinese régime, rep- 
resenting all patriotic elements, than if contending 
groups should fight for power behind the diplomatic 
facade of a National Government. 


U.S. NEEDS A PROGRESSIVE CHINA. It be- 
comes clearer with every passing day that the pur- 
poses of American Far Eastern policy cannot be 
served by an ineffective, backward China. The United 
States stands in need of a forward-looking Chinese 
administration, firmly based in the democratic pro- 
cedures of free speech and press, and genuinely able 
to speak for all important elements in the country. 
Such a Chinese régime would play a maximum part 
in defeating Japan, would be able to participate in 
measures to prevent the resurgence of Japanese mil- 
itarism, and would know how to launch the agrarian 
and industrial reforms required if China is really to 
become a great market. To believe that these pur- 
poses can be achieved by a government which fails to 
take elementary steps toward a united, popular 
régime is to nurture illusions and close one’s eyes 
to the enormous problems that face the United States 
in the Far East. 

The United States has hitherto followed a two- 
fold course of supporting Chungking’s war effort, 
while encouraging China to wage a more effective 
struggle. This general course is still sound, but the 
State Department presumably has been reviewing its 
policy toward China, considering ways of increasing 
its pressure on Chungking and of overcoming the 
difficulties posed by the course of the Chinese régime. 
The time has also come for the American public to 
re-examine its views on China and to advocate a re- 
alistic attitude toward the Chungking government. 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


(The last in a series of articles on conditions in China.) 





REMINDER: The U.S. Post Office has ruled that 
Christmas gift subscriptions for Army men abroad 

be accepted during the current year only if the donor 
has received a letter requesting the subscription. No re- 
strictions have been made on gift subscriptions to men 
in the Navy. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 3, NovemBErR 3, 1944. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FraNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leer, Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dean, Editor. Entered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and compesed and printed by union labor. 








. en 
gage OE 


™ eae : ~~ hye gS 


ranean” 





| Washin ngton News p etter 














GUERRILLA RAIDS REVEAL GROWING OPPOSITION TO FRANCO 


The prospect that the rule of General Francisco 
Franco may be challenged by a revolt—inspired by 
the Supreme Junta of the Spanish National Union in 
Paris and carried out by armed Spanish guerrillas in 
southern France—poses problems for the United 
States both in international and in inter-Amer- 
ican relations. The guerrillas, perhaps 15,000 in 
number, originally aided the French Forces of the 
Interior in the expulsion of the Germans, and are 
reported to have been making raids into Spain from 
the Pyrenees since October 4. The Supreme Junta— 
whose associated group, the National Union of Span- 
ish Intellectuals, on October 10 urged “every con- 
scientious Spaniard” inside the country to “dedicate 
himself to rid Spain of her present totalitarian ré- 
gime’’—has summoned Spanish Republicans in exile 
to meet in Toulouse, France, from November 2 to 5. 
The news about Spanish agtivities along the border, 


however, is unclear, and must be viewed with reserve - 


for the time being. 


POWERS CONSIDER SPANISH POLICY. The 
first question asked by the United States and other 
foreign governments is whether the raids from 
France foreshadow real rebellion. The Brazzaville 
radio on October 23 reported that the spark in south- 
ern France might ignite all Spain. The Supreme 
Junta in France claims some support in Spain; on 
October 24 Spanish Republican headquarters. in Lon- 
don announced through its newspaper, Conquest of 
Spain, that the underground Republican Junta in 
Madrid had summoned Spaniards to a civil war to 
overthrow Franco. On October 28 unofficial informa- 
tion from Spain reported that Spanish Maquis from 
France had seized the village of Canejan in Catalonia 
and repulsed the efforts of government troops to 
retake it. But, although reliable observers estimate 
that 85 per cent of the Spanish population opposes 
Franco, the prevailing official opinion is that the 
raids along the Spanish border will not soon develop 
into revolution because his opponents are weakened 
by divisions among themselves. 

The possibility of civil war is strong enough, how- 
ever, to cause foreign governments to consider the 
policies they might follow should it occur. The Span- 
ish situation is a test of the Allies’ ability to work 
together during the years ahead, and their attitude 
on Spain will indicate whether the mistrust that sun- 
dered the world on the issue of the Spanish civil 
war from 1936 to 1939 will continue to be a disturb- 
ing factor in international relations. Although the 


FOR VICTORY ° 


United States is uncertain about its future moves 
with respect to Spain, the tendency in Britain is to 
favor a policy of no assistance to Franco. Meanwhile 
the Soviet Union has begun to rally Franco's Spanish 
enemies against the government. 

Even in its present limited stage the anti-Franco 
movement raises immediate problems for France be. 
cause of the raiders’ reported use of French soil. On 
the one hand, the de Gaulle government tends to 
support the Spanish exiles because the Franco goy- 
ernment put obstacles in the way of French refugees 
escaping through Spain from the Germans and from 
Vichy agents, and otherwise assisted the Nazis be- 
fore the allies invaded the continent on June 6. Yet 
de Gaulle on October 27 banned Spanish Republi- 
cans from a 12-mile-wide zone north of the Pyrenees, 
and during October Jacques Truelle, Gaullist 
agent, took over the French embassy in Madrid. De 
Gaulle’s formal moves suggest a disposition to sup- 
port the Spanish government which, appealing to the 
French desire for national sovereignty, declared on 
October 11 that raids from France were “compromis- 
ing” the de Gaulle régime. Observers here and in 
London, however do not expect France to take posi- 
tive steps in Franco’s behalf. 


HOSTILITY TO FRANCO IN LATIN AMER- 
ICA. The attitude the United States adopts toward 
the Spanish Republican attack on Franco can affect 
this country’s relations with other American Repub- 
lics. Franco Spain has been an instrument for spread- 
ing the totalitarian idea, and on January 8, 1941 the 
Madrid government created the Consejo de Hispani- 
dad to extend Franco’s influence throughout the 
Americas. Franco has sought close relationship with 
Argentina, and as early as the fall of 1942 broad- 
cast to Argentina that his own and his listeners’ coun- 
tries ‘find themselves travelling the same road and 

. have parallel interests.’ The Moscow radio on 
October 22 accused the Spanish government of “‘ship- 
ping across the Atlantic to Latin America real Ger- 
mans who arrive with the hope of reconstructing 
there the plans of government that failed in Europe.” 
These Spanish activities have irked democratic 
spokesmen in the Americas. Foreign Minister Eze- 
quiel Padilla of Mexico recently restated his govern- 
ment’s policy of non-recognition of Franco, and the 
Cuban government of President Grau San Martin is 
considering a resolution presented by an all-party 
Congressional Committee to break off relations with 


Franco. BLAIR BOLLES 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 

















A 





