nstrument 
world se. 
» that the 
ght decide 
while the 
under the 
mn at San 
proposals, 
he Ameri- 
Inited Na- 
vould the 
sion? The 
to Argen- 
ifferent in- 
at Britain. 
Oaks pro- 
al arrange 
cement ac- 
angements 
rization of 


- Chapulte- 
may try at 
>d Nations 
pproach to 
ites which 
ltepec the 
n decision- 
lecisions if 

of France 
co meeting 
bjectors to 

a fruitful 


. BOLLES 


NDS 


University of Michi 


Ran Rwlhaw 


gan 


Wt nh t wan 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vou. XXIV, No. 22 


Marcu 16, 1945 


—_— 


OKYO’S latest move in Indo-China, abolishing 
the puppet French régime of Vice Admiral Jean 
Decoux, is an attempt to strengthen the Japanese 
hold on this colony in preparation for an Allied 
invasion. The Japanese action, which took place on 
March 10, when Governor-General Decoux and the 
commanders of Indo-China’s army, navy and air 
forces were placed in protective custody, has been 
followed by local resistance of French troops in vari- 
ous parts of the country. 

DECOUX’S SHIFTING STRATEGY. Japan's re- 


i lations with Decoux and his followers—holdovers 


from the days of Vichy France—form a complicated 
story of pressure and maneuver, in which there are 
two constant themes: the desire of the Japanese 
to use their French puppets for all they were worth, 
and the concern of Decoux to be on the winning 
side in the war—whichever side that might be. 
Decoux followed a course of yielding to the Jap- 
anese the resources and facilities in which they were 
interested, while seeking to retain as much as pos- 
sible of the structure of the French administration 
The depths of his collaboration were reached in the 
period immediately after Pearl Harbor, when he 
called on the populations of the French Pacific 
islands—bases then vital to the maintenance of the 
Allied position in the Pacific—to revolt against the 
Free French authorities. 

But by the summer of 1943, when the tide of the 
world struggle had already begun to turn, his strate- 
gy changed to one of using the growth of Allied 
military power to assert a degree of independence 
of the Japanese, at the same time that he sought 
to bolster his personal position. Later, with the lib- 
ftation of France, his policy underwent a further 
evolution, and on September 26, 1944 he declared 
the allegiance of the colony “to eternal France. 
Peace,” he said, ‘will find the mother country strong- 


RESISTANCE MOVEMENT FIGHTS JAPANESE RULE IN INDO-CHINA 


er than ever, and Indo-China linked with France's 
destiny more closely than before.” 

After Decoux was arrested, the Japanese radio 
charged that French officials had cooperated secretly 
with the United States air forces in the Philippines, 
China and India, “as well as with enemy sub- 
marines,’ and that United States planes had been 
permitted to deliver supplies at a landing field in 
northern Indo-China between February 20 and 22. 
Tokyo also declared that at a conference on February 
20 many French military leaders “were known to 
have strongly advocated immediate launching of an 
armed attack on Japan.” It is impossible to know 
whether these details contain any truth, but there is 
nothing inherently improbable in the idea that some 
French leaders may have considered the time ripe 
to break with the Japanese, or that United Nations 
military authorities had established contact with 
Decoux or lesser officials 

NATIONALISTS WAGE RESISTANCE. One 
factor that influenced Decoux in his efforts to main- 
tain a certain reserve toward the Japanese was the 
spirit of resistance among the Indo-Chinese nation- 
alists, as well as among some of the French resi- 
dents of the colony. It was only natural that when 
the Japanese threw Decoux aside, after reaching 
the conclusion that he could no longer serve their 
purposes, they also sought to appeal directly to the 
nationalism of the Annamites, who constitute over 
70 per cent of the population of Indo-China. On 
March 11, in a move that Tokyo had been consider- 
ing at least since the summer of 1944, the “empire” 
of Annam, under its ruler, Bao Dai, declared its 
“independence” of the Government-General of 
Indo-China. By staging this new puppet show the 
Japanese hope to secure something far more impor- 
tant than the wavering Decoux could offer: the sup- 
port of significant sections of the native population. 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


ips eee 


See SS 


2° ee 


—_ 
ee 


Although the Japanese may achieve some success 
in this objective, the grant of a false independence 
is unlikely to influence the active nationalist move- 
ment, which has been anti-Japanese ever since 1940. 
Three insurrections against the invader, in October 
and November 1940 and January 1941, were fol- 
lowed by the organization of the League for the 
Independence of Indo-China in the latter year. The 
League’s efforts, according to its program, are “‘en- 
tirely oriented towards the armed offensive with 
the object of freeing Indo-China from the Japanese 
invader.” Claiming that “hundreds of thousands of 
men are organized and are ready to fight” under its 
direction, this Far Eastern resistance movement some 
time ago appealed for United Nations aid.: The 
League offered in return to furnish information 
about the Japanese Army and French and Indo- 
Chinese Quislings; to cooperate with the Allied 
forces in various ways; and to “tell the Indo-Chinese 
people to welcome the Allied armies and to give all 
help when needed.” 


Page Two 


The anti-Japanese program of the League for the 
Independence of Indo-China is coupled with plans 
for the establishment of a free Indo-China afte 
the defeat of Japan. This raises questions concerp. 
ing the future relations of native nationalists and 
the de Gaulle government in Paris, as well as the 
role envisaged for the resistance movement in the 
operations of Allied forces invading Indo-China 
De Gaulle and other French spokesmen have made 
it clear that France desires to participate fully in the 
Far Eastern war, especially in Indo-China’s liberation 
from the Japanese. They have also pledged a new 
political status for Indo-China within a French im. 
perial federation. Whether this will satisfy nation. 
alist aspirations remains to be seen. But it is appar. 
ent that in Asia, as in Europe, liberation from the 
enemy will be accompanied by a host of problems, 
originating in the pre-war decades, but stimulated by 
experiences under the heel of the Axis conqueror, 


LAWRENCE K. ROSINGER 


UNFINISHED BUSINESS AWAITS SAN FRANCISCO MEETING 


If any of us had assumed that, because of the 
universal lip-service paid to international organiza- 
tion, the job half-finished in 1919 would be com- 
pleted with relative ease in 1945, then the barrage 
of criticism directed against the results of Dumbar- 
ton Oaks and Yalta should serve to dispel that op- 
timistic assumption. This criticism will reach a cli- 
max between now and the San Francisco Confer- 
ence. It centers primarily on five points, all of which 
deserve frank discussion: (1) the relative powers 
of the Security Council and the General Assembly; 
(2) the procedure of voting in the Security Coun- 
cil; (3) the failure of the sponsoring Big Four— 
the United States, Britain, Russia and China—to 
include Poland in the list of invitations; (4) the 
position of France; and (5) the relationship of re- 
gional security arrangements to the United Nations 
organization. 

COUNCIL VS. ASSEMBLY. So far as can be 
ascertained from available information concerning 
objections already raised to the Dumbarton Oaks 
proposals by small nations of Europe and Latin 
America, there is a strong desire that the General 
Assembly, in which small nations are to be repre- 
sented on an equal basis with the great powers, 
should be given authority over matters of security, 
now reserved to the Security Council. The Big 
Three have answered this request with two princi- 
pal contentions: that the great powers, which are 
to be permanent members of the Security Council, 
will have to carry the main military and economic 
burden of assuring world security; and that division 
of responsibility for security measures between the 
Council and the Assembly would result in dead- 


locks, and failure to act promptly against an ag. 
gressor. It was with a view to providing for prompt 
and effective action in case of emergency that the 
Dumbarton Oaks proposals concentrated responsi- 
bility and authority in the small Security Council, 
leaving to the General Assembly administration over 
non-military matters. It is interesting to note that 
some of the people who criticized the League of 
Nations for its inability to check aggression are noy 
alarmed by efforts to endow the United Nations or 
ganization with the substance of power. 

A GREAT-POWER DICTATORSHIP? The 
Yalta compromise on voting procedure in the Se 
curity Council has particularly aroused the opposi 
tion of those who fear that, the stronger the Coun- 
cil, the more difficult it will prove for the United 
Nations to check any one of the great powers that 
may go on the rampage. This fear is linked with 
the belief that Russia was particularly insistent on 
retaining the right to veto any military action that 
the United Nations organization might want to take 
against it; and the statement has been repeatedly 
made that at Yalta President Roosevelt and Prime 
Minister Churchill “gave in” to Stalin on this point 
If past experience is any guide, however, it is diff- 
cult to believe that any international charter which 
did not assure the United States the right to veto 
the use of force against this country could have te 
ceived the approval of the Senate. 

No responsible person, least of all President 
Roosevelt, pretends that the Yalta arrangement of 
voting procedure is more than a compromise. It does 
have the advantage of enabling all nations to ail 
their grievances against the great powers, evel 


—_—_- 


though t 
will requ 
bers of t 
time goe: 
the Unit 
experienc 
peaceful 
mutual f 
consider, 
plaints d 


WILL 
It is noth 
ment wh 
fo conve: 
organizat 
call is Px 
precipita: 
heroicall 
dergroun 
the Allie 
foreshad 
been avo 
—the tet 
governm 
over ay 
which Pi 
in exile, 
task the 
to their 
prove th 
furope ; 
pected tl 
foundati: 
many gr 
be absen 


A clea: 
and an 
formati 
barton 


Foreig1 


_—_—_ 
——__ 
FOREIGN | 
Headquarter 
second-class 
om€ month | 


Sis 


— 


ie for the 
ith plans 
ina after 
; concern. 
alists and 
ell as the 
mt in the 
do-China, 
ave made 
uly in the 
liberation 
ed a new 
rench im- 
fy nation. 
1S appar. 
from the 
problems, 
aulated by 
conqueror. 


ISINGER 


ist an ag- 
or prompt 
y that the 
| responsi- 
y Council, 
‘ation over 
note that 
League of 
mn are now 
Nations or- 


1IP? The 
in the Se 
he oppos 
the Coun- 
the United 
owers that 
inked with 
nsistent on 
action that 
ant to take 
repeatedly 
and Prime 
this point. 
, it is difft 
arter which 
tht to veto 
Id have te 


| President 
igement on 
rise. It does 
‘ions to aif 
wers, evel 


—— 


hough the final decision about the use of force 
will require the consent of the five permanent mem- 
bers of the Security Council. The hope is that, as 
ime goes on, the free play of public opinion in all 
the United Nations, and the slow accumulation of 
aperience in settling international conflicts by 

aceful means, will gradually reduce friction and 
mutual fear to a point where the great powers can 
nsider, with a measure of detachment, the com- 
plaints directed against them by the small nations. 


WILL POLAND BE AT SAN FRANCISCO? 
itis nothing short of tragic that, at the historic mo- 
ment when the United Nations are being summoned 
to convert their wartime coalition into a peacetime 
organization, the one nation missing from the roll- 
all is Poland, whose invasion by Germany in 1939 
precipitated war in Europe, and whose citizens have 
heroically resisted Hitler both at home, in the un- 
derground movement, and abroad, in the ranks of 
the Allies. Perhaps, given more time, the showdown 
foreshadowed by the Yalta Conference could have 
been avoided. But the two main problems of Poland 
| the territorial settlement, and the character of the 
government—have been under active discussion for 
over a year. To help find some middle ground on 
which Poles of diverse opinion, both at home and 
in exile, can meet to reconstruct their nation is the 
task the Big Three set themselves at Yalta. It is 
to their interest to succeed in this task, and thus 
prove that their hopes for orderly reconstruction of 
furope are justified. Because of this it may be ex- 
pected that every effort will be made to speed the 
foundation of a Polish ‘government representing as 
many groups as possible, and that Poland will not 
be absent from San Francisco. 


What will United Nations delegates discuss at the 
historical April 25 meeting? Read 


AFTER VICTORY... 
by Vera Micheles Dean 


A clear, brief survey of world organization in question 
and answer form. Cuts through the mass of technical in- 
formation now being published. Includes text of Dum- 


barton Oaks agreement. 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 E. 38th St., New York 16 


Page Three 


REGIONAL SECURITY AND INTERNA- 
TIONAL ORGANIZATION. Of even greater im- . 
portance is the problem raised by France’s decision 
not to join the Big Four in sponsoring the San Fran- 
cisco Conference. The French are understandably 
sensitive about any measure that may seem to dimin- 
ish the prestige of their country; and through a long 
series of inadvertences the United States, which 
cherishes profound admiration for the French 
people, has created the unfortunate impression that 
it has little patience with General de Gaulle. Yet 
the very fact that de Gaulle, unburdened by pre-war 
commitments and pre-war ties, received relatively 
little support from Washington places him in a 
position of independence which may make it pos- 
sible for France to act as spokesman for small na- 
tions at San Francisco. 


France will not be able to exercise leadership, 
however, if it persists in the attitude that determined 
its decision to abstain from sponsoring the San Fran- 
cisco gathering. For General de Gaulle it was a 
great blow to discover that Stalin preferred to 
subordinate the Franco-Russian alliance to the 
United Nations organization. Yet it is obvious that 
if the United Nations organization is to function 
at all, all regional security arrangements and bi- 
lateral alliances must be placed within its frame- 
work—otherwise it will be doomed to failure from 
the outset. Stalin, so far as one can judge, recog- 
nized this, and to this extent went half-way to meet 
the wishes of this country, which had expressed fears 
about the “power politics’ and “unilateral deci- 
sions’ of Britain and Russia. Under the circum- 
stances it must be hoped that the United States, in 
turn, will dispel the impression created abroad that, 
by the Act of Chapultepec, the Americas have es- 
tablished a regional system of security that could 
defy or ignore decisions of the United Nations or- 
ganization about the Western Hemisphere. 


The closer we come to San Francisco, the more 
we see that we have reached only the first stage of 
a long journey: we have recognized the need for an 
effective international organization that would be 
more than a debating society. Now we have to trans- 
late our desire for an international organization into 
concrete measures that can enlist the voluntary sup- 
port of nearly fifty nations, as well as our own 
people. The real work has just begun. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 


22, Marcu 16, 1945. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y 


w¢ month for change of address on membership publications. 


B51 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 


PeaNnK Ross McCoy, President; Dororuy F. Lugt, Secretary; Vara Michgeies Dean, Editor. Entered as 
scond-class matrer December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


National 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washin gton News Letter 


U.S. WEIGHS MILITARY EFFECT OF CHINESE DISUNITY 


After examining the question of whether a greater 
bluntness in policy on our part would close the di- 
vision between the central government of China in 
Chungking and the leaders in the Communist prov- 
inces in the northwest and the occupied areas, the 
United States government has decided against inter- 
vention, at least for the tirne being. The serious in- 
quiry on this matter accounts, in part, for the presence 
in Washington of General Hurley, U.S. Ambassador 
to China, and Lieutenant General Wedemeyer, 
American Commander in China. 

DELICATE, SERIOUS PROBLEM. This country 
has consistently shown a formal correctness in its 
relations with the legitimate government in China, 
headed by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek. To pro- 
mote unity, the United States has gone no further 
than to tender its good offices; it has used persuasion 
but has not sought to force the issue. Late in Janu- 
ary Ambassador Hurley, acting as go-between, ar- 
ranged negotiations between the Communists and 
the central government, but lacked any authority 
for requiring the two groups to settle their differ- 
ences. The negotiations failed, and today Chungking 
and Yenan are still far removed from understanding. 

Although the United States’ diplomatic correct- 
ness obviously has not brought realization of our 
hopes for Chinese unity, it is difficult to tell whether 
abandonment of that correctness would cause im- 
provement. Intervention to force Chungking to make 
concessions acceptable to the Communists might 
reduce Chiang Kai-shek’s influence over the part of 
China now under central government control. 
Chungking has taken a number of steps toward solid- 
ifying central unity and impressing the outside 
world with its democratic disposition, and on 
March 1 Chiang Kai-shek announced that a Na- 
tional Assembly would convene on November 12 
with all parties represented. But the Communists 
have charged that, without free elections, the con- 
stitutional convention will be a powerless body sub- 
servient to the present régime. 

The war provides the United States with prece- 
dents for intervention in the affairs of an ally in the 
case of Yugoslavia, Poland and Greece. And the 
United States has an instrument for intervention in 
its control of shipments of arms and other war goods 
into China. As part of the policy of correctness, the 
United States has made arms available only to Chi- 
nese forces responsible to Chiang Kai-shek. On 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED STATES 


— 


February 15 General Wedemeyer said in Chungking 
that all United States officers in China are required 
to sign a statement that they will not give assistange 
to individuals or organizations other than those af. 
filiated with the central government. Under a differ. 
ent policy the United States could share some arms 
with the Communists, whose Eighth Route and Ney 
Fourth armies, although poorly supplied, conduct a 
fairly efficient warfare against the Japanese. The 
Communist radio in Yenes reported on March 8 
that during 1944 one unit of the Communist armie 
“operating north of Peiping broke into or captured 
51 Japanese and puppet strongpoints and block 
houses in 234 engagements fought.’’ According to q 
New York Times report of March 10, the Com. 
munists, who depend largely on captured Japanese 
equipment, have asked the United States to make 
available to them Japanese arms and munition 
seized by American forces. 

PROBLEM OF SEPARATE ARMIES. A polig 
of supplying the Communists is opposed by the cen 
tral government, with whom the Communist neg 
tiators discussed the question of separate armies dur- 
ing the February conversations. The government an- 
nounced that it would approve the establishment of a 
committee of three, which would consider reorgan- 
ization of the Communist armies and the question 
of their supplies, with government and Communist 
representatives on the committee having equal 
status. The possibility that an American Army oft 
cer would preside over this committee was suggested 
However, General Chou En-lai, the Communist ne 
gotiator, said on February 15 that the object of the 
Chungking proposal was to place the Communist 
troops under Kuomintang officers. The Communists 
indicate that they are unwilling to relinquish their 
own army until the Chungking government becomes 
democratic. Their sincerity in this attitude will go 
untested so long as one-party government continues 

The disunity in China is a problem of war, not 
ideologies, for the United States. The great Chinese 
political division makes impossible a reasonably ef 
ficient prosecution of the war against Japan on Chi 
nese territory, and its continuation might aid the 
Japanese in the event of an Allied landing in China. 
Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, Commander of the 
Pacific Fleet, hinted on March 8 that a China coast 
landing would precede the invasion of Japan. Such4 
development would seriously strain a divided China. 

BLAIR BOLLES 


WAR BONDS 


1918- 
Fe 


EEE 
You. X XI" 
 anccantal 


AMER 


who has ; 
she atten 


HE I: 
War. 
tions amy 
read into 
terioratio 
ternation: 
believe th 
sters of 
doser ide 
That t 
ome tog 
itself an i 
These pr 
fepresent 
ing whic 
dlaborate 
lad been 
hora of 
onferenc 
Americar 
transition 
uinties tl 
They 
lems and 
merely to 
0 procee 
which ha 
Main pre 
Other has 
iainst t 
hight co; 
potential 
United S 
wrances 


