Entered as 2nd class matter 


WoV1 41. 
Bishoy 


Or. Witlian wy, 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


Vout. XXV, No. 1 


Ocropsr 19, 1945 


U.S. PROPOSES ALLIED ADVISORY COUNCIL ON JAPAN 


te problem of establishing effective machinery 
for Allied consultation on policy toward Japan 
has been brought to the fore by Secretary Byrnes’ in- 
yitation of October 9, asking nine other governments 
to join in creating a Far Eastern Advisory Commis- 
sion. In naming Major General Frank Ross McCoy, 
President of the Foreign Policy Association, as the 
American member, the Secretary of State has chosen 
4 representative with long and varied experience 
both in the Far East and in the general field of in- 
ternational affairs. General McCoy was in charge 
of American relief activities in Japan after the 
Tokyo earthquake of 1923 and later served as 
the American member of the Lytton Commission 
appointed by the League of Nations in 1931 to study 
the Manchurian situation. During World War II he 
served on the Roberts Commission to investigate the 
disaster at Pearl Harbor, and headed the military 
commission which tried eight Nazi saboteurs in the 
summer of 1942. 

THE COMMISSION’S POWERS. Under the 
terms laid down by the United States, the Far East- 
etn Advisory Commission is to make recommenda- 
tions to the participating governments on the “‘poli- 
cies, principles and standards” needed to determine 
Japan's fulfillment of its surrender obligations; on 
the measures and machinery required for Japan’s 
strict compliance with the surrender terms; and on 
such other matters as are assigned to it. The Com- 
Mission is specifically excluded from considering 
military operations or territorial adjustments. Its 
headquarters are to be in Washington, but it may 
meet elsewhere as required. The nations invited by 
the United States include China, the Soviet Union, 
Britain, France, the Netherlands, Australia, Canada, 
New Zealand and the Philippines. At the request of 
the British, India may be added to the list. 

The main features of the proposed Commission are 


these: it is to be purely advisory and will not possess 
powers of control; General MacArthur is not to be 
subject to its direct influence, since its recommenda- 
tions will be made to the participating governments; 
and, because of its size and constitution, the influence 
of any great power will depend in large part on its 
ability to win the support of the smaller members. 
The idea of the Commission is not a new develop- 
ment in American policy; rather it reaffirms the gen- 
eral position taken by this country during the past 
two months. In the latter part of August, shortly 
after the Japanese surrender, Secretary Byrnes in- 
vited Britain, the Soviet Union and China to join in 
creating an advisory body. The Chinese and Rus- 
sians accepted, but no British decision was reached 
until Foreign Secretary Bevin examined the question 
personally with the Secretary of State at the London 
Council of Foreign Ministers. 

JAPAN DISCUSSED AT LONDON. The British, 
who showed some interest in creating a control body 
rather than an advisory one, wanted the com- 
mission to meet in Tokyo, and asked that India be 
included. Then, on September 25, perhaps influenced 
partly by the possibility of British support, Foreign 
Commissar Molotov asked for the establishment of 
an Allied control commission for Japan. Although 
this request was characterized in some press reports 
as a “bomb,” Molotov’s statement was a reasonably 
worded expression of the Russian point of view. It 
was, however, outside the conference agenda and 
went counter to the American position which had al- 
ready been outlined in a White House declaration 
of September 22 in the following terms: “Although 
every effort will be made, by consultation and by 
constitution of appropriate advisory bodies, to estab- 
lish policies for the conduct of the occupation and 
the control of Japan which will satisfy the principal 
Allied Powers, in the event of any differences of 


Contents of this BULLETIN may be reprinted with credit to the Foreign Policy Association. 


opinion among them, the policies of the United 
States will govern.” 

The question of Japan was not considered at the 
formal meetings of the Foreign Ministers, but was 
discussed vigorously outside the regular sessions. As 
a result, Mr. Byrnes announced on September 29 that 
Britain had given its consent to the proposal made 
by the United States in August ‘for the establishment 
of a Far Eastern Commission to formulate a policy 
of carrying out the Japanese terms.” That this was to 
be an advisory body was indicated by the state- 
ment that “the commission will also be asked to 
consider whether a control council should be estab- 
lished and, if so, the power which should be vested 
in it.”” But there was no doubt that the United States 
did not itself favor the idea of inter-Allied control. 

On October 10 Mr. Byrnes underlined the Amer- 
ican position when he told the press that he did not 
believe the proposal for a control commission was 
a wise one. He expressed the opinion that we had 
promised to administer Japan through the issuance 
of directives to the Emperor by General MacArthur 
and that, if the basis of control were changed, we 
would be violating our word to the Japanese. It is 
also understood that General MacArthur would be 
strongly opposed to the establishment of interna- 
tional controls over his policies in Japan, although 
he has made no public statement on the issue. 

U.S. NEEDS AID OF ALLIED PERSONNEL. 
As the Supreme Commander announced on Octo- 
ber 15, the armed forces throughout Japan have been 
entirely demobilized. In recent weeks he has also 
ordered a series of economic, social and political re- 
forms. But because some of our instructions have 


Page Two 


———e, 
ee 


been far-reaching in scope, it is doubtful whether the 
United States possesses sufficient military or technical 
personnel in Japan to insure their full execution. Our 
occupation of Japan is only a partial one, we are in. 
tent on reducing our troops there, and few Amer. 
icans are available who are familiar with Japan or 
the Japanese language. We are, it is true, still operat. 
ing under the handicap of having received the Jap. 
anese surrender much earlier than expected, but it 
seems likely that even when we have reached our 
maximum technical force and have ironed out diff. 
culties in organization, the need for a larger adminis. 
trative staff will remain if the goals we have ap- 
nounced are to be achieved. 

This suggests the desirability of securing addi. 
tional personnel from Allied countries—particularly 
China, Britain and Russia—as well as the importance 
of other nations sending troops to Japan to supple. 
ment our own. That the latter question has been dis. 
cussed for some time was revealed on October 13 by 
an American military spokesman in Tokyo. He de- 
clared on the following day that General MacArthur 
would announce shortly the Russian, British and 
Chinese areas of occupation, and indicated that the 
first forces would be of a token character. It seems 
likely that when Allied forces enter Japan, they will 
automatically be accompanied by a certain number 
of administrators. But cooperation in both the tech 
nical and military fields will be influenced, or even 
determined, by whether the Big Four can agree on 
the procedure for handling Japan. This is one reason 
why the reaction of Russia, Britain and China to the 
American proposals of October 9 is a matter of con- 


siderable importance. LawreNce K. RosINGER 


COST OF VICTORY COMPELS ALLIES TO MAINTAIN WARTIME UNITY 


Lonpon, Oct. 13.—Here at this outpost of war, 
which has become the world’s best watchtower for 
signs of approaching storms, harrowing questions 
about the future press on one from all sides as re- 
ports multiply concerning the hatred and brutality 
left on the continent in the wake of Germany's de- 
feat. People ask themselves in bewilderment what 
the war was fought for. The answer for England is 
plain: the war was fought for national survival. 
But even here, where material and moral conditions 
are immeasurably superior to those on the continent, 
mere survival will not be enough if post-war exist- 
ence proves intolerably harsh and insecure. And 
personal survival itself. seems beyond justifica- 
tion: why are you and I alive today while others— 
gifted, cherished, irreplaceable—are gone? This 
chance opportunity to keep on living seems justifiable 
only if we take advantage of it to make existence 
liveable for others. 

What was shocking about the fiasco of the first 
Council of Foreign Ministers was not that final de- 


cisions on controversial issues were not reached, ot 
that the conferees became deadlocked on questions 
of procedure, but that few of them—so far as can be 
ascertained—acted as if the welfare of millions of 
human beings, already harried and terrorized by war 
beyond the point of endurance, hung on the outcome 
of their negotiations. The imagination, the courage, 
the willingness to experiment and take risks, which 
Allied war leaders displayed on the battlefield and 
in laboratories at work on the atomic bomb, seem 
absent from the discussions that “the lazy men of 
peace” —to use Sheridan’s phrase in The Rivals— 
have been conducting in Washington and London. 
Admittedly, the problems of the peace settlement 
are numerous and baffling. We did not need to wait 
for the atomic bomb to fragment the world. It had 
long been in the process of being blown into bits by 
social and economic convulsions, by old apprehensive 
nationalisms in Europe and new aggressive national: 
isms in Asia and the Middle East. How to reassemble 
these fragments into a workable whole is the task 


— 
we have 
differen 
settleme 
1919 ac 
ization 
had tim 
become 
of this | 
econom 
turned 
as an 0! 
the Uni 
need fe 
increase 
ly ever) 
limited 
Agreen 
Brita 
not ash 
our m: 
what \ 
domin< 
that w 
we co 
withou 
are nc 
Washi 


ain, ac 


) tion w 


ter by 
to app 
and fir 
Ho\ 
narrov 
when 
interes 
by be 
than \ 
a stag 
States 
ganiz< 
believ 


Th: 
probl. 
dilem 
tule « 
their | 
Impe: 
are th 
Chin: 
claim 
to Di 
is the 


fepor 


———— 


ther the 
echnical 
ion. Our 
© are in- 
’ Amer. 
apan of 
| operat. 
the Ja 

, bat & 
hed our 
ut diff. 
adminis. 
lave an- 


ig addi. 
ticularly 
portance 
Supple. 
een dis- 
er 13 by 
He de. 
icArthur 
ish and 
that the 
It seems 
hey will 
number 
he tech- 
or even 
gree on 
e reason 
1a to the 
r of con- 


INGER 


ITY 


ched, or 
juestions 
is can be 
lions of 
1 by war 
outcome 
courage, 
s, which 
ield and 
ib, seem 
men of 
Rivals— 
yndon. 
ttlement 
1 to wait 
1. It had 
o bits by 
ehensive 
national- 
assemble 
the task 


— 


we have barely begun to face. Once more the time 
differential in the development of nations impedes 
settlement on a basis of equality. Britain, which in 
1919 accepted the principle of international organ- 
jzation then unacceptable to the United States, has 
had time during the past quarter of a century to 
become disillusioned with the practical application 
of this principle to problems of military security and 
economic well-being. Once a free-trade country, it 
turned to the sterling bloc and empire preferences 
as an offset to our high tariffs, just at the time when 
the United States—suddenly becoming aware of the 
need for export markets as outlets for our greatly 
increased industrial production—wants to trade free- 
ly everywhere, yet without reducing tariffs below the 
limited point permitted by the Reciprocal Trade 
Agreements Act. 


Britain needs our economic assistance, but it does 
not ask for charity. It asks for freedom to sell in 
our markets so that it can buy from us: exactly 
what we insist on for ourselves in markets now 
dominated by Britain. It is idle for us to expect 
that we can coerce Britain into a trade program 
we consider desirable. A people who withstood 
without flinching the worst of Hitler’s onslaughts 
are not going to yield to economic threats from 
Washington. The United States, 25 years after Brit- 
ain, accepted the principle of international organiza- 
tion when the Senate ratified the San Francisco Char- 
ter by an overwhelming majority. But are we ready 
to apply this principle in practical matters like trade 
and financial relations with Britain ? 

How can we denounce Russia for what we call its 
narrow nationalism, in Eastern Europe or elsewhere, 
when we ourselves tend to consider only our own 
interests? Why don’t we put the Russians to shame 
by being better, more generous, more far-sighted 
than we claim they are? Russia, in turn, has reached 
a stage of nationalism that Britain and the United 
States, newly won to the idea of international or- 
ganizations and consultation with smaller countries, 
believe they have left far behind. The very same 


Page Three 


ST 
TT 


critics in Western countries, who used to be disturbed 
by the internatonal aspirations of the Soviet régime 
in the days of Lenin and Trotsky, are now equally 
alarmed because Russia is acting like an old- 
fashioned national state—showing the same interest 
in the Dardanelles and Port Arthur as the Tsars did. 


The victory of the Labor party has introduced a 
new element into the Big-Three negotiations which 
promises to have far-reaching effects. From the point 
of view of the British, Foreign Secretary Bevin can 
talk just as bluntly as he wants to the Russians (and 
he did at the Council of Foreign Ministers) because, 
unlike some Conservatives, he cannot be accused of 
harboring old-time hostility toward the Soviet gov- 
ernment. Under Bevin, therefore, Britain may be ex- 
pected to take a tougher line toward Russia than it 
did under the suave leadership of Eden, and to do 
so with widespread public support. The Russians for 
their part, although never at ease with Churchill, 
sense in the Labor government quite correctly a seri- 
ous competitor for leadership of Leftist elements on 
the continent. 


Whatever else may happen, these new circum- 
stances will probably result in franker, if less out- 
wardly smooth, discussions than those of Teheran 
and Yalta. But no one who has seen the destruction 
and suffering wreaked by war—and the Russians 
have seen more than the British, let alone the Amer- 
icans—can believe that these negotiations will prove 
vain. Humanity has a tenacity in clinging to life and 
hope which is truly heartrending. Flowers sprout 
among the ruins of London in the shadow of St. 
Paul’s. Children bloom among their elders, whose 
faces are drawn by privations and anxiety. Love de- 
fies war's bestiality. Men and women crave peace and 
the opportunity to share family life with the same 
intensity with which they crave food. Their wants 
are so small, their sufferings are so great. If Allied 
political leaders disregard these wants and sufferings, 
they will be held ultimately no less criminal than the 
Axis war criminals we are about to put on trial. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


COLONIAL REVOLTS FLARE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA 


Thrown into sharp relief as one of the central 
problems left in the wake of the war is the colonial 
dilemma in Southeastern Asia where, with Japanese 
tule ended, the French, Dutch and British now find 
their own supremacy under fire. “Down with French 
Imperialism’ and ‘Death to French Domination” 
are the slogans of the Annamite nationalists of Indo- 
China, while Indonesian leaders in Java have pro- 
claimed they would rather “live in hell” than submit 
to Dutch rule again. Overshadowed by this agitation 
is the situation in Malaya, where rioting natives are 
teported to have demanded independence from the 


British. The bloodiest conflict is in Indo-China, with 
about a thousand casualties reported to date, al- 
though the commander of the “Indonesian People’s 
Army,” according to a Netherlands news agency re- 
port, declared war on the Dutch on October 13—a 
guerrilla war in which the weapons are proclaimed to 
be ‘‘all kinds of fire-arms, also poison, poisoned darts 
and arrows, all methods of arson and any kind of 
wild animals, as for instance snakes.” 

French circles have claimed that the Viet Nam, a 
nationalist organization, represents not more than 
10 per cent of the Annamite population, but revolu- 


ae = Oo . 
peers = = 


—— 


— 
—— a == 


tions are made by small, disciplined and determined 
minorities. Crowded into the densely populated 
coastal plains of Tonkin, Annam and Cochin China, 
the Annamites, two million of whom are reported 
to have starved because of recent crop failures, make 
up 72 per cent of Indo-China’s 23 million. The 
Dutch East Indies, with perhaps 70 million inhab- 
itants, is also suffering from a rice shortage. How- 
ever, revolutionaries must have armed strength and 
the question is whether poison and snakes can be 
supplemented by enough guns to fight off the French 
and Dutch, who are sending in warships with troops. 


JAPANESE BLAMED. Both the French and 
Dutch have tried to lay the blame for the upris- 
ings on the Japanese. The French maintain the Viet 
Nam is made up of Annamites who collaborated 
with the Japanese, and who today hope to hide their 
fascist past by including Communist leaders in their 
membership. This charge is echoed by the Dutch, 
who declare the Indonesian rebellion to be the work 
of a small band of terrorists headed by a Japanese 
puppet. Although there may be some truth in both 
these charges, the significant fact is that educated 
natives, like many of the Annamites of Indo-China, 
proud of a long and rich history and culture of their 
own, have been agitating for years. Hopeful that an 
aroused world opinion will lend new force to their 
claims, they are taking advantage of French and 
Dutch weakness to push their cause to the limit. 

Exasperated by the Indo-Chinese refusal to accept 
assurances of greater autonomy in a Federal Union, 
the French are determined to hold their own. The 
problems of Indo-China are so tremendous that out- 
side aid will be needed for a long time to come, and 
the French feel it only proper they should continue 
the work already begun. In keeping with this view, 
they have adopted a plan to spend several hundred 
million dollars to rehabilitate Indo-China within the 
next year, and nearly 35,000 tons of merchandise are 
already on the way to Saigon. It is not surprising, 
therefore, that peace negotiations between French 
representatives and Annamite leaders are so difficult. 

Like the French, the Dutch have made rather gen- 
eral promises of self-government for their posses- 
sions, but the nationalists want action now. The 
Dutch, however, have so far refused to negotiate with 
the present Indonesian leader, Soekarno, on the 
ground that he collaborated with the Japanese. Mean- 
while, Japanese troops, under British orders, attempt 
to restrain the rebels. This puzzling use of Japanese 
troops is to be explained by the fact that their forces 


Page Four 


— 
— 


still so far outnumber Allied soldiers in Java anq 
Indo-China that they are being employed as a matte 
of military expediency. 

IMPERIAL RIVALRIES. The British role has 
been a source of irritation to both the French apg 
Dutch, for British commanders in Indo-China and 
Java have tried to bring the French and Dutch repre. 
sentatives into negotiations with rebel leaders. |p 
Indo-China the French are confronted with an Allied 
decision to divide the country into a northern sphere 
under Chinese jurisdiction, and a southern sphere 
under the British, until the Japanese are out and the 
French in a position to take over again. Arrange. 
ments are now being made by the respective govern. 
ments to recognize French civil administration dur. 
ing the temporary British and Chinese military occu. 
pation. The British and Chinese positions, although 
correct, may have the same effect of undermining 
French prestige that British policy did in Syria and 
Lebanon. The Annamites, incidentally, claim they 
have Chinese support in their struggle for inde. 
pendence, although Chiang Kai-shek has declared 
Chinese troops would neither encourage the inde. 
pendence movement nor help the French suppress it. 


Malayan agitation for independence is much less 
strenuous than that of the Annamites or Indonesians, 
but the British have announced that a new constitu. 
tional status will be granted to British Malaya. What 
this will mean to the people is not yet clear. The 
British plan is to combine the Malay States and the 
Straits Settlements into a “Malayan Union” with a 
new Malayan citizenship, while making Singapore 
into an entirely separate colony. 

What will be the future of these colonial peoples? 
Their moral rights are undeniable. Yet to the powers 
security and economic interests dictate that they 
must remain in the Far East. Such a dilemma can 
hardly be solved other than by compromise. The 
wisest policy for the European powers seems to be 
one of making generous concessions. 


VERNON McKay 


NEW RESEARCH STAFF MEMBER 


The Association announces with pleasure the appoint- 
ment to the Research Department of Vernon McKay. Mr. 
McKay received his Ph.D. from Cornell University; studied 
at the School of International Studies in Geneva; and for 
the past nine years has taught history at Syracuse University. 
The author of several articles on French colonial policy, 
Mr. McKay, as a member of the F.P.A. staff, will concen- 
trate on colonial affairs and the problems of dependent 
peoples. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXV, No. 1, Ocropgr 19, 1945. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 
Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor, 


Beis 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dororny F. Legt, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered ® 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leas 


radio- 
Japan 
home 
of sec 
steel 
tivene 
giant 
may k 
weap 
States 
FU 
ator 
befor 
on O 
have 
tion < 
For © 
warf; 
ceed 
woul 
attac 
and } 
Uni 
plan 
tack 
ator 
plan 


to sé 


