tth 

ast, ty 
Opera. 
of the 
prom. 
to the 
ates ip 
ime by 
1, it is 
might 
is with 
Dutch} 
On on 
ds will 
to that 
fication 


foreign | 


ublicize 
ridst of 
propa- 
aziS ate 
United 
tablish. 
are sub- 
surpass 
m, the 
> world 
Western 
‘gent to 


Dr. William w. Bishop 
% University of 


Ann Aarhor. Wich. 


Entered as 2nd class matter 
De 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXI, No. 20 


—_—_— 


Marcu 6, 1942 


‘Y their air attacks on the Andaman Islands, 
on February 24 and .26, the Japanese have for 

the first time struck directly at Indian territory, 
thereby bringing this vast country within the range 
of their conquests. The military threat, considered 
remote only three months ago, raises in acute form 
the question of India’s cooperation in the war effort. 
At the close of his recent visit to India, Chiang Kai- 
shek appealed to Britain to grant “real political 
power” to the Indian people, so they would realize 
that participation in the war would be “the turning 
point in their struggle for their own freedom.” In 
London the new Lord Privy Seal, Sir Stafford Cripps, 
predicted in the House of Commons on February 25 
that a “decision’”’ on India would soon be announced 
—presumably while there was still time to enlist the 
masses of that country in an all-out war effort. In 
both London and Washington there was a growing 
belief that drift and indecision should be ended and 


the con-} a transitional agreement promptly reached. 


ain and 
eir Own 
ination. 

connec: 


do well | 


t Union. 
shed be 
wars of 

against 
ategory. 
y of the 
nguishes 
le—thus 
is them: 
beration 
tion for 
ter, and 


elt this| 


te terms 
ES DEAN 


OBSTACLES TO SIMPLE SOLUTION. The 
pressing need for India’s wholehearted participation 
in the war points up the geographical, religious and 
political factors which have so far stood in the way 
of a solution of the problem of Indian independence. 
India, as large as continental Europe without Russia, 
is divided into the eleven provinces of British. In- 
dia and 562 semi-independent Indian states. The 
Native princes of these states govern about one- 
third of the sub-continent and about one-quarter of 
the population of almost 400 million. The princes 
are technically subordinate to the paramount power, 
the British Crown, which helps to maintain their 
existence. The Indian people are also divided on 
teligious lines: the two leading sects are the Hindus, 
with 240 million people, and the Moslems, with 
80 million. The Moslems predominate in the prov- 
inces of Bengal in the east and in the Punjab, Sind 
and the Northwest Frontier in the west. In the other 


DEADLOCK IN INDIA 


seven provinces they are a relatively small propor- 
tion of the population. 

During the last war India contributed about $500,- 
000,000 to the Allied war machine, and 1,300,000 
Indians rendered military service in Europe and the 
Near East. In recognition of India’s efforts, the 
British government announced in August 1917 that 
it favored ‘‘the gradual development of self-govern- 
ing institutions with a view to progressive realiza- 
tion of responsible government in India as an in- 
tegral part of the British Empire.” The constitutions 
of 1919 and 1935 were steps in this direction. Al- 
though provincial self-government was to a large 
extent established in 1937 and the leading political 
parties assumed office, a projected federation of 
British India and the native states was rejected as 
unsatisfactory by the Indian groups. The Moslems 
protested against the power given to the Hindus, 
while the Congress party objected to the prerogatives 
left with the princes and, above all, to those retained 
by the British Crown. Hence the Viceroy, with an 
Advisory Council, continues to govern in Delhi. 

CONFLICT BETWEEN POLITICAL PARTIES. 
The two leading political parties in India, the Con- 
gress party and the Moslem League, have shown 
impatience at the delay in granting Dominion status. 
After failing to obtain this limited status from 
the British government, the Congress party, largest 
and best organized political group in India, pro- 
claimed independence as its goal in 1930. The 
demands of the Moslem League have also grown 
more extreme. Under the leadership of M. A. Jin- 
nah, the League has insisted that it will not submit 
to majority rule by the largely Hindu Congress party, 
despite any special safeguards which might be es- 
tablished. To dramatize the absolute refusal of the 
League to cooperate with the Hindus in a national 
government, Mr. Jinnah in 1938 proposed the cre- 
ation of an independent Moslem state of Pakistan, 


comprising the northwestern provinces of India. 
While this plan was doubtless advanced as a bar- 
gaining measure, it is now enthusiastically supported 
by thousands of Moslems. Congress charges that 
the strong obstructionist line taken by the Moslem 
League is fostered by the British, whom it accuses 
of pursuing a “divide and rule” policy. Although a 
few of the old-guard British civil servants in India 
look with satisfaction on the inability of the Mos- 
lems and Hindus to agree, the British government 
opposes creation of an independent Pakistan. 


EFFECT OF THE WAR. The political situation, 
already precarious, grew rapidly worse when the 
Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, announced on Septem- 
ber 3, 1939 that India was automatically at war. 
Before taking any action, the Congress party issued 
a statement of policy on September 15 in which it 
requested the British government to announce its 
war aims with special reference to India. One month 
later, the British government published a White 
Paper reiterating its intention of granting Dominion 
status, but deferring until after the war any steps 
in the direction of self-government. As an interim 
measure the Viceroy proposed the formation of a 


U.S.-BRITISH PACT FORESHADOWS POST-WAR COOPERATION 


Urging the American public not to fall prey to 
Nazi propaganda which seeks to create ill-feeling 
between the United States and Great Britain, Lord 
Halifax, British Ambassador, reminded a Philadel- 
phia audience on February 26 that suspicion and 
mistrust between peoples of the United Nations 
could seriously hamper their war effort. A danger 
of even greater magnitude, he stated, was that 
Britain and America would lose the peace after the 
war unless they stopped “pulling one another 
apart.” A hopeful step in that direction was taken 
three days earlier in Washington when an Anglo- 
American economic agreement was signed, outlining 
the broad principles which will govern economic 
relations between the two powers after the conflict. 

CAUSES OF DISUNITY. Lord Halifax declared 
that the American and British people share in com- 
mon a cast of mind, due to Puritan influences in the 
past, which leads individuals to be more conscious 
of defects in others than in themselves. It is also 


—[S__a~=E___=_ Page Two —_—_—_————————-_—<—¥¥___*_*_*_"="*": 


To what extent has the impact of war affected 


economic relations between the United States and 
Latin America? Read: 


WARTIME ECONOMIC COOPERATION 
IN THE AMERICAS by John C. deWilde 


25¢ 


February 15 issue of FoREIGN Po.icy REPORTS (issued on 
the 1st and 15th of each month. Subscription, $5 a year; to 
FPA members $3). 


National Defense Advisory Council, composed of 
representatives of the political parties, the natiye 
princes and the government. The Congress party 
termed the Viceroy’s offer “wholly unsatisfactory’ 
and called upon its ministries, which controlled eigh, 
of the eleven provinces of British India, to resign, 
The Moslem League was equally disturbed by th 
policy of the British government, and announced i 
refusal to cooperate in the war effort unless Mos 
lems were granted an independent state. 

Although the British government has relaxed jt 
rigid policy to the extent of expanding the Viceroy; 
Executive Council (to include a majority of nop. 
official Indians) and setting up the Defense Coup. 
cil, the deadlock continues. The Congress party de 
mands assurance that its members will be fightin 
for the freedom of Indians as well as others: the 
Moslem League insists upon the creation of Pakis 
tan; and the British government repeats that the 
Hindus and Moslems must come to some agreement 
before it can act. Now that the Japanese have al. 
ready raided Indian territory, the deadlock must be 
broken so that the Indians will wholeheartedly resis 


Japan S$ expansion. Marcaret La Foy 


apparent that mutual criticism has been fanned by 
the succession of defeats sustained by the Unite 
Nations, which have led Allied peoples to look 
everywhere for scapegoats. American criticism nov 
appears to center on Britain’s alleged preference foi] 
keeping intact the defenses of the British Isles 
rather than taking the offensive in Western Europe 
or the Near East. The British maintain that, since 
the islands remain in danger of imminent attack by 
Nazi forces just a few miles across the Channel 
(as contrasted with America’s relative immunity t0! 
direct assault) they cannot afford to weaken thei 
defending forces by dispersion, or hazard them ai 


this time by opening up new fronts—a suggestion 
made by Soviet Ambassador Litvinov at the Over| 
seas Press Club on February 26. 


Since Britain has long been in danger, and grate 
ful for outside aid, British criticism of the Uae 
States has not perhaps been as vocal. Resentment 
has been voiced in some circles, however, conceft 
ing the unwillingness of the United States to par 
ticipate actively in the war before December 7, it 
failure to organize immediately for total war, ané 
the slowness with which American war matériel i 
reaching the fighting fronts. 


Public criticism of government in a democracy is n0 
in itself open to objection. Even in wartime, democrat 


ic states maintain a large measure of freedom of &} 


pression within their borders, believing that it promote 
efficiency in the prosecution of the war and insutt 


=—— 


reserve 
of forel 
ynjustif 
motivat 
plays di 
fax ind 
calls no 
policies 
to deve 
Nation: 
each of 

AGR 
The Ai 
quary 
rather t 


8} represes 


of a be 
vides tl 
over to 
for lea: 
shall te 
formati 
tions” 

may in 
inform: 
in the 
benefit 
repaym 
comme 
mote n 
tween 

nomic 
are to 
other : 
sion, | 
measu! 
change 
materi: 
all pec 


The 
Presid: 
both f 
cance 
remov: 
Albert 
etnme 
princi 
eratior 
profes 
many 
pathie 
concre 
ments 
the U 


sed of 


native 


nust be 
ly resist 


\ Foy 


ined by 

United 
to look 
sm now 
ence for 
h Isles, 
Europe 
it, since 
ttack by 
Channel 
unity to 
en thei 
them at 
g gestion 
e Over: 


id grate | 


> United 
entment 
concefi 

to pat 
er 7, it 
var, and 
tériel ii 


icy is no 
emocrat 
m of e& 
promote 
1 insures 


— ee 
——— 


reservation of the democratic system. But criticism 
of foreign governments, as well as of one’s own, is 
unjustified when it is captious, unconstructive, or 
motivated by narrow nationalism. Such criticism 
lays directly into the enemy’s hands, as Lord Hali- 
fax indicated. The successful conduct of the war 
calls not for continued attempts to find flaws in the 
policies of the other United Nations, but for efforts 
to develop areas of agreement between the United 
Nations and to strengthen the military power of 
each of them. 


AGREEMENT LOOKS TO POST-WAR ERA. 


‘| The Anglo-American economic agreement of Feb- 


quaty 23 is concerned with future contingencies 
rather than the present situation, and in that sense it 
represents a notable contribution to the building 
of a better world order once the war is won. It pro- 
vides that, in determining the benefits to be made 
over to the United States by Great Britain in return 
for lease-lend materials, the American government 


‘| shall take cognizance of “all property, services, in- 


formation, facilities, or other benefits or considera- 
tions” furnished by Britain. This broad category 
may include such intangible assistance as military 
information or the cooperation of the British Navy 
in the Battle of the Atlantic, which is of direct 
benefit to this country. Moreover, the conditions of 
repayment by Britain ‘‘shall be such as not to burden 
commerce between the two countries, but to pro- 
mote mutually advantageous economic relations be- 
tween them and the betterment of world-wide eco- 
nomic relations.” The terms of the final settlement 
ate to provide for action by the two countries and 
other states of like mind “directed to the expan- 
sion, by appropriate international and domestic 
measures, of production, employment, and the ex- 
change and consumption of goods, which are the 
material foundations of the liberty and welfare of 
all peoples; to the elimination of all forms of dis- 


= Page Three 


criminatory treatment in international commerce, 
and to the reduction of tariffs and other trade bar- 
riers; and in general, to the attainment of all the 
economic objectives set forth’ in the Atlantic 
Charter. 

The document has been criticized in some quar- 
ters because it deals only in generalities, and pro- 
vides no specific plan for the settlement of mutual 
obligations at the close of the conflict. It would be 
difficult, however, to frame a more detailed agree- 
ment until the war is over and the lease-lend transac- 
tions concluded. The purpose of the present docu- 
ment appears to be to impress the American public 
and the peoples of the world with the necessity of 
approaching economic questions in a different spirit 
than that which prevailed after the last war. The 
peace treaties and the debt settlements of that era 
were dominated by the ideas of economic national- 
ism, as expressed in tariff barriers and other methods 
of trade discrimination, the manipulation of foreign 
exchange for national ends, and the development 
within national boundaries of industrial systems de- 
signed to make states economically independent. 
Characteristic of that period was the attempt by the 
creditor nations to collect war debts and reparations 
while refusing to accept in trade the goods and 
services of the debtor countries. This reversion by the 
people of all nations, and particularly the United 
States, to economic nationalism was characterized by 
Mr. Wendell Willkie on February 24 as “one of the 
primary causes of the present war.” 

The Anglo-American agreement is a signpost 
pointing the way to a saner international order. Be- 
fore it becomes truly effective, however, its prin- 
ciples must be communicated to the peoples of the 
respective nations in such terms that they can ap- 
preciate the practical value of abandoning certain 
purely national advantages in favor of international 
economic cooperation. Louis E. FRECHTLING 


CRISIS IN URUGUAY AFFECTS ALLIED CAUSE 


The dissolution of the Uruguayan Congress by 
President Alfredo Baldomir, on February 21, has 
both foreign and domestic ramifications. Its signifi- 
cance for the United States lies in the fact that it 
removes all trace of the influence of Senator Luis 
Alberto de Herrera and his supporters from the gov- 
emment. The Herreristas had long constituted the 
ptincipal source of opposition to a policy of coop- 
eration with Washington, and although their leaders 
professed to be neither anti-British nor pro-Nazi, 
many of them were suspected of totalitarian sym- 
pathies. President Baldomir is now freer to put into 
concrete form the stanch pro-democratic  senti- 
ments undoubtedly cherished by a large majority of 
the Uruguayan people. 


Uruguay and the United States are already coop- 
erating closely in the construction of Uruguayan 
aviation bases and the enlargement of the Uru- 
guayan Navy. In July 1941 Montevideo had pro- 
posed to the other American republics that an Amer- 
ican state engaged in hostilities should be considered 
a non-belligerent. When war broke out in the Pa- 
cific, the Baldomir government, like those of Ar- 
gentina and Chile, at once placed this policy into 
effect as regards the United States. On January 24 
diplomatic relations with the Axis powers were 
severed, and on February 5 Britain was also granted 
the privileges of a non-belligerent. Thus Allied ves- 
sels may make free use of Uruguay's harbors—an 
important privilege in view of the country’s strate- 


; 
(My 
ey 
a 
li | 
ea: | 
at: 
ong 
BS: 
rt 
Raa 
ie 
it i: 
ye 
+ 
x 
"ihe 
ah 
44 
ve 
i 
\ 
vl 
AR 
Bhd 
ay 
<0 
dg a 
eas 


me 


nd eo ee 
ger a Se 
Se 


= 


BSF a en <n 
Ses = = 


Sipigh Bi igs = 


gic position at the mouth of the River Plate and in a 
region where Axis influence tends to be strong. 


DOMESTIC IMPLICATIONS. Within Uruguay 
itself, the dissolution of Congress and the indefinite 
postponement of Presidential elections scheduled 
for March 29 are viewed in a different perspective. 
The roots of the internal crisis may be found in a 
compromise arrangement embodied in the constitu- 
tion adopted in 1934, in which the strongest minor- 
ity party was granted three seats in the Cabinet, as 
against the majority’s six, while the two groups 
shared equally the thirty seats in the Senate. Given 
this foothold in the government, the Herreristas 
formed an obstructionist bloc which continually 
hampered the government. In 1941 President Baldo- 
mir managed to dismiss the three opposition Cab- 
inet Ministers, but reconstruction of the Senate on 
a more representative basis was prevented by the 
difficulty of amending the constitution. Under its 
terms, approval by a majority of all the registered 
voters was necessary for any changes; and since 
many voters fail to go to the polls, amendment in 
this instance was considered virtually impossible. 
President Baldomir therefore proposed that the con- 
stitution be altered by a majority of the votes actu- 
ally cast, and that a plebiscite on the composition 
of the Senate take place simultaneously with the 
forthcoming Presidential election. The intransigent 
opposition of the Herreristas to this proposal pre- 
cipitated Baldomir’s seizure of full powers. 

The President's action, although apparently mo- 
tivated by a desire for more representative institu- 
tions, is none the less an illegal coup d’état. It is 
especially resented by a number of Uruguayan po- 
litical groups because they had hoped that the 
shadow of dictatorship, which has hung over the 
country since Gabriel Terra seized power on March 
31, 1933, would be removed in the pending electoral 
contest. Terra’s government was incompetent rather 
than ruthless; in 1938, when its authority reached 
a low ebb, it permitted an election in which both 
Presidential candidates were relatives of the dic- 
tator. Despite mass abstentions by important politi- 
cal factions, Baldomir, the more liberal of the two 
contestants, was chosen for the Presidency. 

IS BALDOMIR A DICTATOR? From the first, 
however, his opponents have suspected that he, 
too, had dictatorial aims, and that he might in some 
manner circumvent the provision of the constitution 
forbidding a President to succeed himself. Hence 
it is not surprising that only three of the country’s 


Page Four 


F.P.A. Radio Schedule 
Subject: IMPERIALISM IN TRANSITION 
Speaker: William P. Maddox 
Date: Sunday, March 8 
Time: 12-12:15 p.m., E.W.T., over Blue Network 


For station, please consult your local newspaper 


seven leading political groups have consented § 
accept representation on the Council of State whid 
Baldomir is organizing to replace Congress. The 
others have protested against the coup and are de 
manding a free election. And the Herreristas—ep. 
joying broad support in the rural districts—seem 
prepared to operate underground as an opposition 
which might be useful to the Nazis. They hold that 
Baldomir, by acting illegally, has forfeited the Pres. 
dency to Dr. César Charlone, the Vice President— 
whose democratic loyalties are not above suspicion, 

In the long run, therefore, the result of the coup 
may prove to be unsettlement of Uruguayan politics 
which would hinder rather than help the policy of 
cooperation with the United States and the supply 
of strategic materials important to the Allied war 
effort. This complex situation, with its confusing 
possibilities, is a typical one in a country where 
many advanced social institutions have been intro- 
duced by a long succession of enlightened leaders, 
but where mass political education is still somewhat 


retarded. Davip H. Popper 


NEW MEMBER OF RESEARCH STAFF 


The Foreign Policy Association is pleased to an- 
nounce the appointment to its research staff of Mr. 
Ernest S. Hediger. A Genevese by birth, Mr. Hediger 
is a Licencié és sciences économiques of the Uni 
versity of Geneva. After five years in diplomatic 
service, Mr. Hediger joined the staff of the Interna 
tional Labor Office in 1927, serving for thirteen 
years. Last year he spent over six months in Mexico 
studying the possibilities of industrial development. 
Since his return from Mexico, he has been on the 
staff of the International Labor Conference, held at 
Columbia University in October-November 1941. 


The Philippines: A Study in National Development, by 
Joseph Ralston Hayden. New York, Macmillan, 1942. 
$9.00 


This superb volume will long remain a definitive work 
for all political scientists with an interest in the Philip 
pine Islands, especially during the Commonwealth period 
prior to outbreak of war in the Southwestern Pacific. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXI, No. 20, Marcu 6, 1942. 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Secretary; Vera MicHELes Dan, Editor; Davin H. Poppsr, Associate Editor. 


N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. 


<GBw 81 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Witttam P. Mappox, Assistant to the President; Dorotuy F. Last, 
Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


Vou. XX 


| 


S tl 
tic 
axioms 
indelib! 
in Eurc 
unsupp 
against 
nomic | 
power. 
play th 
goals s 
powers 
in 194 
of init: 
Americ 
that g 
positio 
seized 
But 
Europe 
outcon 
merely 
measu. 
social 
pact o 
ing mi 
ed in 
facade 
tinue 
situati 
the ex 
native 


wrest 


