—— 


1 execu. 
cuaran- 
Turkish 
id Alex. 
ctory to 
syria as 
and No. 
ies with 
endence 
3. Tur. 
cres in 
ab rule, 
ntained 
-ompact 
Novem- 
ssion of 
nsettled 
ture of 
ed with 
ns and 
oters in 
ria em- 
sanjak, 
League 
1 before 
». Both 
— which 
ore the 
private 
reached, 
mission 
France 
cements 
yer, and 
Syrian 
id fora 
League 
ore New 
demon- 
present 
neets on 
otiation 
o result 
larantee 
perhaps 
port of 


ISHER 


T 


ssociate, 
d a year 
ions in 
ude pos- 
‘kefeller 


I 

|. National 

BAN, Eéitor. 
Year. 


“TEOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


Subscription, One Dollar a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


Vou. XVI, No. 138 


JANUARY 22, 1937 


SPAIN: CIVIL WAR 

by Charles A. Thomson 
This report covers the history of the first six months 
of civil war in Spain, and analyzes its three-fold char- 


acter: the military conflict, the social struggle of revo- 
lutionary change and reaction, and foreign interference. 


January 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents 


Dr. William W. Bishop 
% University of Michigan Library 
Ann Arbor, Mich. 


neem 
— 


FRENCH STABILITY CONTRIBUTES TO PEACE | 


oe encouraging factor in the disturbed Euro- 
pean situation is the growing stability of 
the French government. The Popular Front min- 
istry of Léon Blum has now been in office for 
more than six months, and—barring unforeseen 
eventualities—seems assured of a long lease on 
power. How firmly Premier Blum has entrenched 
himself was indicated on January 15 when the 
Chamber of Deputies promptly and unanimously 
authorized the government to stop the recruit- 
ment of volunteers for service in Spain whenever 
an international agreement to that effect is con- 
cluded. 

By his moderate economic and social reforms 
at home and his policy of peace abroad, the Prime 
Minister has rallied behind him the majority of 
the French public. Fascist and Communist senti- 
ment appears to be waning. Although Colonel 
de La Rocque held the first annual congress of his 
newly constituted French Social party in Decem- 
ber, his activities are attracting less attention 
than formerly. A strike of market gardeners 
called on December 14 by the semi-Fascist Peas- 
ant Front ended in a fiasco; and the meetings 
convened by Jacques Doriot and his Fascist 
French Popular party are but sparsely attended. 
The Communists seem to regret their temporary 
break with the Popular Front government early 
in December, and are now supporting the cabinet 
more consistently. 

In the closing month of the 1936 Parliamen- 
tary session the government managed to obtain 
the adoption of a number of highly controversial 
measures. To “purify” the press it secured the 
enactment of a law increasing responsibility for 
slander and requiring publication of the sources 
from which newspapers derive their financial 
support. To deal with recurring labor conflicts 
the conservative Senate and the Chamber of Dep- 
uties finally empowered the government to pro- 
vide by decree for compulsory mediation and arbi- 


= = 


tration. On January 2, moreover, the all-impor- 
tant budget and fiscal reform bills were passed 
after prolonged debate. 

Almost all of the labor disputes which have 
plagued the government from the very beginning 
have now been settled. During the first week of 
January, government intervention was finally suc- 
cessful in terminating the metallurgical strike 
in northern France which had kept 25,000 men 
idle for more than a month. Minor strikes in the 
Paris area were also adjusted. Whether the gov- 
ernment can prevent the revival of conflicts will 
depend on its ability to limit the rise in the cost 
of living and to enforce arbitration of eventual 
disputes. 

The state of public finances arouses some 
anxiety for the future. The ordinary budget for 
1937 has an anticipated deficit of 4,589 million 
francs, and an additional fund of 16,026 million, 
to be raised entirely by loans, has been appro- 
priated for national defense and public works. If 
the railway deficit and the needs of a newly created 
pension fund are added, the government will have 
to borrow about 30 billion francs in the course of 
the year. It can obtain about 5 billion more from 
the Bank of France, but the remainder will have 
to be borrowed in the open market. Fearing rad- 
ical government measures and domestic disturb- 
ances, a large part of French capital remains 
hoarded at home and abroad. In order to pave 
the way for a return of confidence, the govern- 
ment has recently abandoned its “big stick” policy 
toward capital. Instead of requiring the sur- 
render of gold at its old parity, a new defense 
loan floated on December 16 offered a premium 
of 40 per cent at the end of three years to those 
giving up gold and subscribing to government 
bonds. At the same time the Finance Minister 
gave assurances that capital would be allowed 
complete freedom of movement. 

The success of the government’s program of 


“deficit financing” depends primarily on the de- 
gree of economic recovery during 1937. In some 
respects the effect of devaluation has proved keen- 
ly disappointing. Although exports during Octo- 
ber and November were 17 per cent higher in 
value than in the same months of the previous 
year, the sale abroad of manufactured products 
declined 10 per cent in volume. Moreover, im- 
ports rose 34 per cent in value over the corres- 
ponding total of 1935. Nevertheless, some fav- 
orable signs are gradually appearing. Toward 
the end of December wholesale prices had risen 
about 25 per cent since devaluation, while retail 
prices had increased only half as much, thus nar- 
rowing a disparity which had long existed. Pro- 
duction is slowly rising and unemployment run- 
ning below the levels of the preceding year. Tax 
receipts, too, are steadily improving, the yield in 
the turnover tax having shown a particularly en- 
couraging increase. If assured a period of calm, 
the government can look forward to continued 
economic recovery. JOHN C. DEWILDE 


SPAIN’S FIRST SIX MONTHS OF WAR 


Strengthened by some thousands of German 
and Italian “volunteers,” the Spanish Rebels re- 
sumed offensive operations on January 3. A 
seven-day attack northwest of Madrid brought 
local gains, but failed to break the Loyalist lines. 
On the southern coast a force of 20,000 In- 
surgents captured on January 14 the small port 
of Estepona not far from Gibraltar, and subse- 
quently was reported driving east toward Malaga. 


The Spanish war, at the end of its first six 
months, had passed through three phases. The 
first phase was marked by the failure of the army 
generals to carry out their plans for a quick and 
easy victory, which was due primarily to the des- 
perate resistance of the popular masses. Madrid 
and Barcelona were thus saved for the govern- 
ment, and the Franco rebellion suffered a decisive 
check. A series of Rebel victories, made possible 
by German and Italian airplanes and supplies, 
characterized the second period of the conflict. In 
the north, Irin and San Sebastian fell before the 
middle of September. In the southwest General 
Franco captured Badajoz and later relieved 
Toledo. By November 7 his forces were at 
the gates of Madrid. The third stage—from No- 
vember to the present—has been marked by a 
practical stalemate. With the arrival of Soviet 
munitions and some thousands of foreign anti- 
Fascists, as well as the Catalan militia, the Loyal- 
ists have been able to hold Madrid. The govern- 
ment has also had time to train, discipline and 


Page Two 


eee ee 
—— 


equip its raw militia. Greater unity has been 
achieved in the ruling groups at Madrid and jp 
semi-independent Catalonia. In the Largo Caba- 
llero cabinet formed on September 4, the middle.’ 
class Republicans were joined by Socialists and 
Communists, and also by the Basque Nationalists 
—a conservative and Catholic party. Two months 
later the Anarcho-Syndicalists entered the goy. 
ernment—overcoming not only their hostility to 
the Socialists but their traditional aversion to 
political action. On September 26 the Anarcho. 
Syndicalists at Barcelona had taken a similar step, 

Underlying the military struggle is a more 
fundamental conflict between social classes. The 
Rebel Junta at Burgos, supported by the large 
landholders and industrialists, Monarchists and 
Fascists, and the bulk of the clergy, has suspend- 
ed agrarian reform in the territories under its 
control, returned rural properties to the land.’ 
lords and made religious instruction compulsory 
in the schools. The Loyalists, however, have ini- 
tiated a far-reaching program of socialization, 
pledging compensation for foreign property 
seized. The social policy of the central govern. 
ment, which moved from Madrid to Valencia 
early in November, has largely been determined 
by emergency war needs. Catalonia has gone 
farther, and points definitely toward social revo- 
lution. In this leading manufacturing region, a 
decree of October 24 ordered the socialization of 
all industrial and commercial concerns employing 
more than 100 persons; smaller enterprises were 
also to be socialized under certain conditions. The 
trend is apparently toward a hybrid anarcho- 
socialist economy, in which the Marxist emphasis 
on a centralized state would be modified by An- 
archo-Syndicalist principles of personal freedom 
and local autonomy. 

With their revolutionary social program, the 
Loyalists apparently enjoy wider popular support 
than the Rebels—a supposition which is partially 
substantiated by Franco’s manifest dependence on 
foreign troops. This factor, together with control 


of Spain’s principal industrial areas and its ex-| 


tensive gold reserve, may give the government a| 
long-term advantage over the Insurgents if only 
domestic forces are taken into account. Foreign 
aid so far has served chiefly to prolong the con- 
flict but, if it continues to increase, may prove to 
be the deciding weight in the balance. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


Spain in Revolt, by Harry Gannes and Theodore Repard. 
New York, Knopf, 1936. $2.00 
A hasty and sketchy account by two members of the 
Daily Worker’s staff. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVI, No. 13, JaANuaRY 22, 1937. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lesiigp BugLL, President; EstHER G. OGDEN, Secretary; VERA MICHELES DEAN, Béitor. 


Entered as second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. One Dollar a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


National 


