





. 3. 
_| FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 
An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff an 
see Subscription, Two Dollars a Year Ofice ax ‘New York 
nor” i. N. Y., ander the act 
onal ata \C FORBIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated of March 3, 1879. 
eo ™ 8West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 
Vou. XVII, No. 10 DECEMBER 31, 1937 
ntry, Announcing a new series of WORLD AFFAIRS PAMPHLETS General Library : 
ures, | EUROPE IN CRISIS, by Vera Micheles Dean | 
Cap- In this 56-page pamphlet Mrs. Dean presents a search- University of Michigan 
nme- ing analysis of the European situation. The concluding 
section—Which Way Peace?—is a realistic appraisal Ann Arbor, Michigan | 
ndra of various solutions proposed for European problems, 
mer- and of the attitude of the United States. 
mber FREE to FPA members. To non-members, 25 cents a copy. ) 
parry) —— _ | 
7 JAPAN APPEASES NEUTRALS 
ident , , ; ‘ : ! 
n of ae eNLY easing the tension which had gripped __ such interference occur, even in the undefined realm Wy 
» that Japanese-American relations for almost a fort- | of American “interests,” the stage would be set for ii 
matic | night, the American government informed Tokyo more acrimonious exchanges. WW 
1gton | on Christmas Day that it accepted the amends made Japan’s overwhelming fear of an acute altercation il 
ittee, | by Japan for the attack on the gunboat Panay. The — with the United States appeared responsible for the i) 
Pery | American communication followed closely on re- fact that the note giving final satisfaction to the il 
mber | ceipt of a Japanese note published December 24, British, whose vessels were shelled in the Yangtze i 
; ac-} Which amplified the terms of Foreign Minister on the day of the Panay bombing, was delayed until | 
later. | Hirota’s original apology. Recapitulating the Ameri- December 28. Whether or not such an effect was 
ccess- | can demands, the Japanese government firmly main- intended, Japan’s extreme deference to American i 
gness tained its contention that the incident was an unin- sensibilities has for the present scotched tentative | 
‘onist 4 tentional error; detailed the orders given to its armed gestures toward Anglo-American cooperation, which 
sabo-§ forces to prevent recurrence of similar attacks; and is highly feared in Tokyo. That such a move is 
;, the stressed the fact that disciplinary measures taken constantly in prospect beneath the surface in Wash- if 
ques- against the responsible naval personnel had a “sig- ington was intimated on December 21, when Presi- i 
with-} Bificance of special importance.” dent Roosevelt replied to Governor Alf Landon’s tele- | 
ve to} This obvious reference to Tokyo's determination tam urging united national support of the executive 
al jus-§ to check heedless interference with the rights of neu- in foreign affairs with the aaa that “we are a 
ed. | trals has proved satisfactory to Washington; but part of a large world and as such “owe some mea- 
on | there is no evidence that the Emperor has been in- sure of cooperation” in maintaining standards of in- 
formed of American concern over such events, as re- ternational conduct. 
quested by President Roosevelt. Major discrepancies In Britain the desire for such cooperation is over- 
subsist, moreover, between Japanese military reports shadowed by the realization that it is still impracti- 
raham| at the affair was an accident unavoidable in cable. Foreign Minister Anthony Eden, speaking in 
the confusion attending the fall of Nanking, and — Parliament on December 21, complemented Prime 
xed by} the American naval findings, released on Decem- = Minister Chamberlain’s demand for Japanese assur- 
France} ber 24, strongly implying that the attack must have ances regarding British interests with the plain hint 
eat t0/ been intentional. These matters may have been the that coercive measures against Japan were impos- 
ogra | subject of supplementary private explanations which sible without overwhelming naval force — which 

some sources believe were given by Japanese officials could be provided only by the United States fleet. 
k, Put- | t0 achieve the détente. In any case, the most ominous Britain itself shows no desire to take unilateral naval 

aspect of the crisis as a whole rests in its potentiali- action. 

of the} ties for the future. The United States note expresses Japan’s efforts to forestall the crystallization of a 

papers: | the hope that “the steps which the Japanese govern- coalition hostile to its designs won success in an- 
——| ment has taken will prove effective toward pre- other quarter when the U.S.S.R., on December 21, 
Neue} Venting any further attacks upon or unlawful in- agreed to extend Japanese fishing rights in Siberian 

terference by Japanese authorities or forces with waters for one more year. The new arrangement had 

American nationals, interests or property.” Should been preceded by threats that “forcible measures” 






































































ES 


= 




















——— 


might be taken to preserve the Japanese industry, 
and by a sharp protest against the illegal arrest of 
Japanese subjects on Soviet territory. The basic clash 
of Soviet-Japanese policies was evinced by the an- 
nouncement in Moscow on December 19 that an 1800- 
mile strategic railroad paralleling the Trans-Siberian 
from Lake Baikal to Khabarovsk had been completed. 
But settlement of the fisheries dispute, it was be- 
lieved, would greatly diminish the likelihood of un- 
due tension in Soviet-Japanese relations in the im- 
mediate future. Meanwhile, reports that the 
U.S.S.R. was preparing to furnish munitions on a 
large scale to the Chinese via the difficult overland 
route seemed to have little if any foundation in fact. 


The problem of supply threatens to become crucial 
for China as Japan prepares an offensive against 
Canton, the sole remaining source of war ma- 
terials of any considerable importance. To divert 
Japanese energies from this life-line, or possibly in 
retaliation for Japanese vandalism in Nanking and 
elsewhere, the Chinese on December 18 began the 
systematic destruction of Japanese properties in 
Tsingtao, principally cotton mills valued at $87,000,- 
000. Prompt and effective Japanese reprisals fol- 
lowed this violation of an alleged agreement with 
governor Han Fu-chu, under which Japanese inter- 
ests in Shantung were safeguarded as long as the 
province remained outside the theater of war. In- 
vading columns crossed the Yellow River and, on 
December 27, captured Tsinan, the provincial capi- 
tal, while the Japanese naval blockade was extended 
to Tsingtao on December 26. In Central China an 
advance up the Yangtze to Hankow was contem- 
plated. Hangchow, southwest of Shanghai, fell to 
the Japanese with little opposition on December 24. 

Entrenched by right of conquest from the Man- 
choukuo border to a point south of the Yangtze, the 
Japanese military are already confronted with the 
immense task of restoring some measure of peace 
and order to regions now plagued by anarchy and 
starvation. It is significant of the strength of Chinese 


’ national sentiment that no Kuomintang statesman 


of any importance can be found to head a civilian 
authority established for this purpose. The new 
government created on December 14 at Peiping— 
known once more as Peking—has been staffed by 
notoriously corrupt pro-Japanese puppets who had 
faded into complete obscurity with the rise of the 
Kuomintang a decade ago. Hoping to utilize it as a 
means of pressure on Chiang Kai-shek’s régime, 
Japan has not yet officially extended recognition or 
filled its chief executive post. But even if the Jap- 
anese succeed in forcing the breath of life into their 
new vassal state, they will not be able to relinquish 
their burden in its “independent” territory. Ruth- 
lessly pushing on into China without thought of the 
consequences, Japan’s militarists have only succeeded 


Page Two 











—- 
—— 





in saddling their nation with a load beside which the 
vexatious pacification problem in Manchoukuo pales 


into insignificance. Davip H. Poppsr 


LOYALIST VICTORY AT TERUEL 


Forestalling General Franco’s long-announced 
“final” offensive, Loyalist troops on December 2} 
captured the important city of Teruel in southerp 
Aragon. An enveloping movement carried forward 
through seven days of hard combat finally gave the 
attackers command of this strategic point. Although 
the insurgents were apparently caught off guard. 
they put up a stubborn resistance and on Decem. 
ber 28 some thousands of defenders were still 
holding out, particularly in the Seminary buildings 
situated in an upper and older section of the tows 
Meanwhile, an insurgent army of 40,000 men had 
been rushed up to oppose the Loyalist thruse, and 
fierce fighting continued on the outskirts of the cig 

If the gains at Teruel can be held, they represent 
a far more significant victory for the government 
than the partial success at Brunete last July. Capture 
of the city will pinch off Franco’s most threatening 
salient, for the Rebel advance in this region hat 
been extended to a point only sixty miles distant 
from Valencia. Although an Insurgent drive to the 
Mediterranean coast would have split Loyalist 
Spain, cutting off Madrid from Catalonia, General 
Franco’s projected campaign had evidently been 
planned for another area. The government, more. 
over, has taken the offensive away from the Insur- 
gents and disrupted the latters’ plans by forcing 
diversion of troops to the new theater of war. Finally, 
the victory should give a much-needed boost to 
Loyalist morale, undermined by successive defeats, 
food shortages behind the lines and partisan bick 
erings. The government triumph speaks well for the 
temper of its troops. Staff work has evidently im 
proved, for only a high degree of coordination 
among various arms made possible the success o! 
operations carried out over a difficult mountain te 
rain, and in the face of bitter cold, blinding snow 
and a fifty-mile wind. If the Loyalists can withstand 
the powerful insurgent counter-attack, expectations 
of an early end to the civil war, either through 
the decisive rout of the Loyalist armies or through 
a negotiated peace, may have to be revised. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


FASCISM GAINS IN RUMANIA 


The resignation on December 26 of the Rumaniat 
Premier, George Tatarescu, whose conservative Na 
tional Liberal party had been defeated in the get 
eral elections of December 21, brought to a climat 
the political conflict which had- been rending Ru 
mania during the past month. The government 


(Continued on Page 4) 











—— 


h the 
Pales 
ER 


Inced 
tf 21 
thern 
‘ward 
e the 
ough 
juard, 
ecem- 
still 
dings 
town 
1 had 

and 
oC < ity 
resent 
ment 
apture 
rening 
n had 
listant 
to the 
oyalist 
eneral 

been 
more: 
Insur- 
orcing 
inally, 
OSt to 
efeats, 
. bick 
‘or the 
ly im 
nation 
ess Of 
in tet 
- snow 
hstand 
tations 
1rough 
1rough 


SON 


nanian 
ve Na 
eget 
climax 
ig Ru 
rnment 








W ashington News Letter 


| ll 

















WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


Dec. 27—While the bombing of the Panay is 
now regarded as a ‘closed incident,” the affair has 
given new impetus to plans for an extensive rearma- 
ment program which will be launched during 1938 
with the twofold object of strengthening American 
diplomacy in the Far East and holding the relative 
position of the United States among the major pow- 
ers. Formal announcement of the first step in the 
new program may be expected early in January, when 
the Administration will ask Congress to increase 
next year’s naval construction program beyond the 
normal allotment for 1938-9, thus exceeding for 
the first time the limits fixed in the “treaty program” 
laid down in the Vinson-Trammel act of 1934. To 
what extent the Army will share in the increased 
budget is not yet certain, although it is understood 
that proposals for implementing the mechanization 
and motorization programs have already received of- 
ficial blessing. 


Armament spending urged to combat depres- 
sion. The whole question of armaments has been 
under consideration here for some time. During 
November national defense expenditures were dis- 
cussed in relation to the business recession as well 
as the general international situation, with an arma- 
ment budget of two billion dollars—double this 
year’s expenditure—frequently mentioned as a pos- 
sible stimulus to heavy industry and re-employment 
of labor. No action, however, was taken on the new 
naval program until after the sinking of the Panay. 
On December 11, the day before the bombing, the 
Bureau of the Budget approved the normal “replace- 
ment’ program contemplated under the Vinson act. 
This normal program, which is now before the 
House appropriations committee, calls for two capi- 
tal ships of 35,000 tons each, two light cruisers, 
eight destroyers, six submarines and four auxiliaries, 
all to be laid down in the fiscal year 1938-9. While 
details of the new program are carefuly guarded, it 
is expected to include one or more capital ships, and 
substantial increases in aircraft carriers, cruisers and 
submarines. As the treaty limits have already been 
teached in cruisers and aircraft carriers, any further 
increase in these categories will mark a departure 
from the present program and call for a new author- 
ization from Congress. 

Naval competition in full swing. Renewed con- 
struction by other great powers, notably Great 
Britain and Japan, is cited in naval circles here as 


one of the primary factors behind the new expansion 
program. Since the expiration of the Washington 
and London naval treaties just one year ago, these 
two powers have laid down a combined total of more 
than 500,000 tons in new ships, and presumably 
both have exceeded the maximum levels of the old 
limitation agreements. Great Britain has under con- 
struction no less than 96 vessels, including 5 capital 
ships, 5 aircraft carriers and 21 cruisers, as compared 
with 87 ships, including 2 capital ships, 3 aircraft 
carriers and 10 cruisers for the United States. While 
it is true that the United States no longer regards 
Britain as a competitor, the British fleet will remain 
a yardstick as long as American policy rests on the 
formula of a Navy “second to none.” Thus in naval 
circles here particular stress is laid on the deficiency 
in aircraft carriers and cruisers. In the former cate- 
gory, Great Britain has a total of 11 ships built and 
building as compared with 6 for the United States. 
In cruisers, the British have increased their ultimate 
objective to 70 ships, of which 58 are actually built 
or building, as compared with 37 built or building 
for the United States. Even if the Navy Department 
adheres to its ultimate objective of 50 cruisers, hinted 
at last year, there remains a gap of some 13 new ships 
for which authorization must be asked from Congress. 


The Japanese program is shrouded in complete 
secrecy, as the Tokyo government has published 
no official figures since the expiration of the limi- 
tation agreements. Naval circles here, however, attach 
some importance to reports published recently in 
the semi-official Italian press, alleging that Japan has 
embarked on an ambitious building program which 
includes three super-battleships of 46,000 tons 
mounting 12 sixteen-inch guns. Whether or not 
the reports are authentic, several Washington cor- 
respondents have been told privately that the data 
published in Italy are confirmed in part by informa- 
tion received from American sources. In addition to 
the Japanese program reported at the end of 1936, 
Japan is said to have under construction today a 
total of 294,000 tons in new ships which would bring 
her total fleet, built and building, up to 1,119,000 
tons as compared with a total of 1,418,000 tons for 
the United States. These reports may be no more 
substantial than the usual crop of rumors which pre- 
cede the annual naval appropriation bill, but the 
absence of official information makes it all the more 
difficult to establish the facts and that much easier 
to persuade Congress to vote the necessary funds. 


At the present moment, despite the strong senti- 








ment for the Ludlow war referendum, there seems 
to be little doubt that Congress will support a sub- 
stantial increase in army and navy appropriations. 
Quite apart from the Far Eastern crisis, Administra- 
tion leaders have sought to impress on Congress the 
tial threat to American interests inherent in 
the spread of the Fascist movement in Latin Amer- 
ica. While there is no immediate challenge to the 
Monroe Doctrine, it is clear that American diplomacy 
would not tolerate any move which might weaken 
the position of the United States in the Western 
hemisphere. WiLtiaM T. STONE 





FASCISM GAINS IN RUMANIA 
(Continued from Page 2) 
failed to obtain the 40 per cent of the popular vote 
which, according to Rumanian law, would entitle 
it to 50 per cent of the seats in the Chamber of Depu- 
ties, the balance being distributed proportionately 
among all parties. This system encourages electoral 
combinations between political groups which hope, 
in coalition, to obtain the desired 40 per cent. When 
King Carol II, who has given the country a form of 
enlightened, mildly pro-German, despotism, entrusted 
Tatarescu in November with the task of conducting 


Page Four 


a 














the elections, the opposition parties, fearing govern. 
ment manipulation of the vote, joined forces in ap 
effort to assure fair elections. The liberal National 
Peasant party of Dr. Maniu—which opposes Carol's 
“camarilla” government, demands restoration of 
democracy and supports a pro-French orientation ip 
foreign policy—surprised the country by concluding 
an electoral deal with the anti-Semitic Iron Guard of 
Zelea Codreanu, which advocates Fascist dictator. 
ship and close collaboration with Germany and Italy, 


The Iron Guard, which hitherto had had no par. 
liamentary representation, appears to have been the 
chief beneficiary of this unholy alliance, winning 66 
out of 387 seats in the Chamber as compared with 
only 86 for the National Peasants, and 154 for the 
National Liberals. Premier Tatarescu, balked in a 
last-minute attempt to juggle election returns, con- 
sequently found it impossible to form a government. 
It was reported that King Carol might entrust Oc. 
tavian Goga, leader of the ultra-nationalistic and 
anti-Semitic National Christian party with the forma. 
tion of a coalition cabinet, which would serve asa 
screen for the King’s personal dictatorship. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 





The F.P.A. Bookshelf 


How to Use Pictorial Statistics, by Rudolph Modley. New 
York, Harper Bros. 1937. $3.00 


By the director of Pictorial Statistjes, Inc. An indis- 
pensable aid to anyone who wishes to use the new picture 
methods of conveying figures and facts. 


Reciprocal Trade: a Current Bibliography, United States 
Tariff Commission, third edition. Washington, U.S. 
Tariff Commission, 1937. 


The value of this exhaustive and useful compilation, 
which includes items published during the early months 
of 1937, is enhanced by an excellent index. 


Poison in the Air, by Heinz Liepmann. Translated from 
the German by Eden and Cedar Paul. Philadelphia, 
J. P. Lippincott, 1937. $2.50 


Vivid description of what to expect when the chemical 
and bacteriological war begins; alarmist in content and 
anti-German in presentation. 


Germany Since 1918, by Frederick L. Schuman. New York, 
Henry Holt and Company, 1937. $1.00 


Professor Schuman gives a brief and graphic account of 
the demise of the Weimar Republic “conceived in defeat 
and born in national bitterness and humiliation.” As in 
his earlier and more detailed work, The Nazi Dictatorship, 
the author’s description of the Third Reich is colored 
strongly by his political convictions. 


A Program of Financial Research. New York, National 
Bureau of Economic Research, 1937. Volume I, $1.00; 
Volume II, $1.50 


The first volume outlines an ambitious program for re 
search in credit and finance, and the second performs a 
useful service for students by surveying all the work now 
being done in this field by individuals and organizations. 


Socialism versus Capitalism, by A. C. Pigou. New York, 


Macmillan, 1937. $1.75 


Without arriving at any definite conclusion, a noted 
British economist sets forth the merits and weaknesses of 
socialism and capitalism. While he indicts capitalist so- 
ciety for its inability to prevent glaring inequalities of 
wealth, to avert harrowing depressions and to make the 
best possible use of productive resources, he also sees 
appalling difficulties in adequately carrying out socialist 
planning. 


Economic Planning and International Order, by Lionel 
Robbins. New York, Macmillan, 1937. $2.50 


Professor Robbins subjects all efforts at economic plan- 
ning to severe criticism. He holds in particular that plan- 
ning of international exchange will lead inevitably to the 
“noliticalization” of foreign trade with consequent aggra- 
vation of international tension. While all “planners” will 
read this book with profit, many will legitimately criticize 
the author for exaggerating the merits of the relatively 
free economy to which he proposes to return. 





FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 10, Dacempzr 31, 1937. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMOND Lasiimg Bugit, President; VERA MicHE.es DEAN, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





National 
Entered as second-class mattef 





F 


oo 


A | @& oO re KR OoO?lUlUmllUlr TC OOlUCUCDrtlUrlClUlh Sl Cc 


a wn 


nA w- fh = Oo Pes Oe 


— 








