ench 
The 
ink of Z 
bor and 
dvent to 
> crop of 
e French 
Jed since 
inet with 
ippressed 
1938, the 
ver been 


en work- 


es of the 
is collab- 
e the fall 
ey sought 
ubted the 
> England 
idemic of 
; in 1941 
>nt Roose 
in time. 

dlitical in- 
ar. Unlike 
iously af 
) that this 
patriotism 
production 
ntrance of 
labor lead 
t William 
ip Murray 
ited Mine 
would call 


atened not 
goods and 
: his move 
e future of 
rm of gov 
t after the 
unctions if 
be enough 
war—the 


ow to com 


ELLIOTT 


INDS 


*BRIODICAL ROVA 
G@ENBRAL LIBRARY 
UNIV. OF MIGM. 


FORE 4IGN POLI 


MAY J 4 1943 Entered as 2nd class matter 


General Library 
University 


of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, Wich. 


CY BULLETIN | 


—————— 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 30 


__ 


May 14, 1943 


NORTH AFRICAN VICTORY PATTERN FOR ULTIMATE AXIS DEFEAT 


brilliant Allied victory in Tunisia, which 
reached its climax on May 7 with the occupation 
of Bizerte and Tunis, is obviously one of the de- 
cisive events of World War II. Just as Hitler’s in- 
yasion of the Low Countries in May 1940 started a 
chain of developments which led to the conquest of 
Europe, so this Allied victory three years later is 
bound to bring military and political repercussions of 
similar magnitude. 

GERMAN COLLAPSE UNEXPECTED. A col- 
lapse as sudden and complete as that of the Axis 
forces in Tunisia is almost unknown in German mili- 
tary history. It shows, perhaps even more clearly 
than Stalingrad, that the Nazis cannot resist Allied 
arms when these are brought to bear in sufficient 
strength. Skillful use of concentrated air pounding, 
massed artillery fire, and infantry and tank attacks 
was apparently responsible in large part for the 
tapid Allied advance. But the Germans also seem to 
have made strategic and tactical blunders in their 
defense of Tunisia. They not only attempted to hold 
lines that were too long for their reserves, but per- 
sisted in basing on hills and crags major positions 
which appeared strong but actually exposed them 
to assaults against which they had extremely limited 
fields of fire. With their supply and replacement sys- 
tems inadequate, the morale of Axis forces seems to 
have broken when these “strong points’’ were cracked 
by persistent Allied attacks coming from many points 
at once. 

WHERE WILL ALLIES STRIKE NOW? The 
Western Allies can probably be expected to strike 
their next blow at Sicily and Sardinia, and at the 
small Axis-held bases in the Sicilian Straits. Control 
of these islands would clear the central Mediter- 
fanean for our supplies and profoundly affect the 
whole global war picture. It would provide a short 
supply route not only to the southern front in Russia, 
but also to India and China. This would give the 


Allies for the first- times thesimeans~of 

the unity of strategic reserve®which is always 
essential to unified comimand. Moreover, it would 
permit the oil and gasoline needed in French North 


Africa to be shipped by barge from the Near and~ | 


Middle East rather than by tanker across the sub- 
marine-infested Atlantic from the United States. 
With the central Mediterranean cleared, the way 
would be open for the Allies to mount an offensive 
from Africa and the Mediterranean islands against 
Italy or southern France and, if Crete too were oceu- 
pied, against the Balkans. 

At the same time an early diversion from Britain 
against Norway, or even a major offensive across 
the English Channel must not be left out of the 
reckoning. Since the Allies possess superior air and 
sea power, and German strategic reserves are well 
back from the European coastal defenses, it seems 
reasonably clear that a bridgehead can be effected 
wherever the Allies wish to strike. The great task will 
be to convert that bridgehead into a large-scale of 


fensive. But here the Allies, holding outside dines,” 


have an opportunity to draw off German reserves by 
a feint from one direction while making the real 
attack from another. Until fighter and bomber 
strength—which must have been withdrawn from 
Britain for the Tunisian campaign—can be replaced, 
however, a decisive thrust based on the British Isles 
can hardly be expected. 

REACTION TO TUNISIAN VICTORY. Politi- 
cal repercussions of the Allied victory ini North Af- 
rica are now being felt throughout the world. Grow- 
ing restlessness among the occupied peoples of Eu- 
rope is causing the Nazis great concern. In Holland 
the Nazis have resorted to martial law. In Turkey, 
and among the Arabs of the Middle East, belief in 
an Allied victory is rapidly gaining ground, while in 
northern Europe Sweden is showing increased in- 
dependence. In Spain, too, there was recognition of 


oe ag ao 5 Ee a ee = 
aS Rg = abs 


— ae = 
a 


Soe 
ona AE 


= 
= ae 


Allied power, for on May 9 General Franco declared 
that the war had now reached a stalemate, which 
made immediate peace the only sensible course for 
all belligerents. 

Among the United Nations, the effect of Tunisia 
has been equally significant. China is heartened by 
this show of Anglo-American striking force and 
hopes that it heralds a strengthening of Allied power 
in the Far East as well as in Europe. The Soviet 
Union evinces real appreciation of the efforts of its 
Western Allies and will undoubtedly meet any spring 
or summer offensive which Hitler may launch against 
the Russian armies with even greater confidence. 


Page Two 


— 


The Allied victory, too, should smooth the path to 
French unity, with all that will mean both for the 
future of France and the further success of Allied 
forces. Finally, it is clear that the political and eco. 
nomic cooperation forged over many months betweeg 
Britain and the United States has now developed, 
under General Eisenhower's leadership, into effec. 
tive military collaboration. As President Roosevelt 
said in his message to General Eisenhower: “The 
unprecedented degree of Allied cooperation makes 
a pattern for the ultimate defeat of the Axis.” 


HowarD P. WHIDDEN, Jr. 


POLISH PROBLEM TESTS RELATIONS OF GREAT AND SMALL POWERS 


The Soviet-Polish controversy, which for a few 
days had shown signs of abating, flared up anew on 
May 7, when Soviet Vice Foreign Commissar An- 
drey Y. Vishinsky made a statement to the British 
and American press accusing members of the Polish 
Embassy in Russia of espionage and pro-German 
activities. This statement, issued two days after 
Stalin’s letter to the New York Times correspondent 
in Moscow, in which the Soviet Premier declared 
that the U.S.S.R. “unquestionably” wants a ‘‘strong 
and independent Poland” following the defeat of 
Germany, has added to the prevailing confusion in 
this country concerning Soviet aims and policies. It 
might be useful, under the circumstances, to review 
the main issues raised by the Soviet-Polish contro- 
versy. 

The first thing that must be borne in mind is that 
no American layman, without official knowledge of 
Soviet-Polish relations since the German invasion of 
Russia in 1941—which reversed Russia’s attitude to- 
ward Poland—can reach anything resembling a well- 
founded judgment about the activities of Poles de- 
ported or evacuated to Russia after Poland’s collapse 
in 1939. If past experience is a guide, there are prob- 
ably rights and wrongs on both sides. 


RUSSIA WANTS FRIENDLY POLAND. But 
whatever may be the merits of the controversy over 
the activities of these Poles, there is no reason to 
doubt that Stalin was sincere when he said, on 
May 5, that the U.S.S.R. wants a relationship based 


For a survey of the League’s contribution to inter- 
national collaboration, and an analysis of the 
accomplishments of League agencies now function- 
ing and the International Red Cross, READ— 
GENEVA INSTITUTIONS IN WARTIME 


by Ernest S. Hediger 


25c 


May 1 issue of ForEIGN PoLicy REPORTS 
REPORTS are issued on the Ist and 15th of each month. 
Subscription, $5; to FPA members, $3. 


upon “solid good neighborly relations and mutual 
respect’” with a “‘strong and independent Poland,” 
or, if the Polish people so desired, ‘‘an alliance pro- 
viding for mutual assistance against the Germans as 
the chief enemies of the Soviet Union and Poland.” 
For years before 1939 the Soviet government had 
regarded with suspicion the activities of the Polish 
government of “colonels,” and especially of its For- 
eign Minister, Colonel Beck, believing that this 
group, inspired by anti-Russian and anti-Communist 


sentiments, was ready to play ball with Hitler against | 


the U.S.S.R. 


These suspicions were sharpened by the realiza- 
tion in Moscow that Poland, whose industrial and 
agricultural backwardness made it highly vulnerable 
to German pressure, would prove unable to resist an 
attack by Germany, which would place German 
armed forces directly on the Soviet border. Russia's 


worst expectations on that score were realized when | 


Germany invaded Poland on September 1, 1939. 
The subsequent occupation by Russia of Polish 
Ukraine and Polish White Russia, and their incor- 
poration on November 29, 1939 into the Ukrainian 
S.S.R. and the White Russian S.S.R., respectively, 
was justified from the Russian point of view by con- 
siderations of self-defense. 


But justifiable as these measures may appear from 
the Russian point of view, this does not mean that 
they become automatically acceptable to Poles whose 


concept of a “strong and independent Poland’’ does } 


not include surrender of territory to Russia, now Po- 
land’s ally among the United Nations. Nor is it easy 
for Americans who have consistently opposed en- 
croachments by this country on the territory of 
weaker nations in the Western Hemisphere to defend 
similar encroachments by Russia on the territory of 
adjoining countries. A convincing case can always 
be made by a great power which believes that its 
security or economic position is threatened by the 
policies of weaker neighbors. The admittedly difficult 
equation between great and small nations may be 


ince pfo- 
rmans as 
Poland.” 
rent had 
1e Polish 
F its For. 
that this 
mmunist 
© against 


> realiza- 
trial and 
ulnerable 
resist an 
German 
- Russia's 
zed when 
1, 1939. 
£ Polish 
eir incor- 
Jkrainian 
pectively, 


w by con- 


ear from 
nean that 
les whose 
ind” does 
now Po 
is it easy 
s0Ssed en- 
ritory of 
to defend 
rritory of 
in always 
s that its 
sd by the 
ly difficult 
s may be 


—— 
7_™ 


resolved either by the complete or partial subjugation 
of the small nations—a policy hitherto denounced 
by the Soviet government as “imperialism’”—or by an 
attempt to develop relations of equality within the 
larger framework of a regional or world organiza- 
tion. It must be hoped that the United Nations, in- 
duding Russia and the United States, will follow 
the latter policy during and after the war—and that 
the small nations, in turn, will show a spirit of co- 
operation and not of nationalist intransigeance. 


POLISH PEOPLE MUST DECIDE. The fact that, 
for a quarter of a century, Russia has been separated 
from the Western world by mutual suspicion and 
hostility serves to obscure today, on both sides, the 
urgent need for building collaboration between them 
on new, and not on outworn, foundations. The sec- 
ond mission to Moscow of former Ambassador Jo- 

h E. Davies, who is to deliver to Stalin a mes- 
sage from President Roosevelt, presumably urging 
a personal meeting between them, may help to dis- 
sipate Moscow’s recurring suspicions about the aims 
of Britain and the United States. Even more effective 
in this respect are the victories of Allied forces in 


THE F.P.A. 


Modern World Politics, by Thorsten V. Kalijarvi. New 
‘York, Crowell, 1942. $5.00 


Eighteen experts on international relations analyze fun- 
damental factors governing the world struggle for power. 
Intended primarily as a college text, but chapters on geo- 
politics and total espionage will attract wider audience. 


China After Five Years of War. New York, Chinese News 
Service, 1942. $1.00 
Informative essays on Chinese government, military af- 
fairs, economic conditions and education, written for the 
most part by staff members of the Ministry of Informa- 
tion in Chungking. 


Voices of History: Great Speeches and Papers of the Year 
1941, by Franklin Watts, ed., with an introduction by 
Charles A. Beard. New York, Franklin Watts, Inc., 1942. 
$3.50 
Out of a mass of material covering the world-wide war 

here is a selection of representative pronouncements chosen 

80 as to point up critical and important events and deci- 

sions. Its chronological arrangement and excellent index 

make it a most workable reference tool as well as of his- 
torical value. This is the first of a planned series. 


Documents on American Foreign Relations, July 1941-June 
1942, edited by Leland M. Goodrich with the collabora- 
tion of S. Shepard Jones and Denys Myers.Boston, World 
Peace Foundation, 1942. $2.75 
Fourth volume in a useful series. 

Fiji, Little India of the Pacific, by John Wesley Coulter. 
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1942. $2.00 


_A discussion of life in the Fiji islands, particularly the 
mpact of large-scale immigration from India on native 


Page Three 


North Africa, which bring closer the moment when 
the opening of a second front in Europe may relieve 
German pressure on Russia. But indiscriminate 
American apologia for Soviet policy do not offer a 
sound basis for Russo-American collaboration in 
winning the war, and the peace after the war. Stalin, 
in his controversy with the Polish government in 
London, takes the view that that government con- 
tains elements who had been hostile to Russia before 
1939, and does not represent the Polish people. This 
issue, which is the real crux of the Soviet-Polish con- 
flict, cannot be settled by Russia alone, or by the 
other great powers unreservedly backing Russia. It 
must be settled by the Polish people to whom Stalin 
is directing his appeal. What the United Nations can 
and should do is to create the conditions for a free 
expression of opinion on the part of the Polish 
people. This can be done only by the defeat of Ger- 
many, which holds Poland in thrall. Any attempt to 
divert attention from this first objective can only 
prolong the agony of both the Poles and the Rus- 
sians now living under the Nazi yoke. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


BOOKSHELF 
society. Throws light on the nature of the South Pacific 
islands. 


The Self-Betrayed: Glory and Doom of the German Gen- 
erals, by Curt Riess. New York, Putnam, 1942. $3.00 
This tale of the rise and fall of German generals gives 

a good insight into the mentality of the “Junker” class 

which expected to rule Germany through Hitler. In spite 

of frequent unverifiable statements, the book is useful. 


Latin America: Its Place in World Life, by Samuel Guy 
Inman. New York, Harcourt, Brace, 1942, rev. ed., $3.75. 


A new edition of this classic on Latin America, brought 
up to date and considerably enriched. Mr. Inman’s book 
is undoubtedly one of the few excellent treatments of the 
subject. 


Year of the Wild Boar, by Helen Mears. New York, Lip- 
pincott, 1942. $2.75 


A revealing description of the daily life of Japan, with 
constant emphasis on the “real” Japan—of rigid customs 
and non-Western ways that lie behind a modern facade. 
The author’s fascinating account forms a valuable accom- 
paniment to works on Japan’s international relations and 
internal political and economic conditions. 


Basis for Peace in the Far East, by Nathaniel Peffer. New 
York, Harper, 1942. $2.50 


Highly instructive and provocative analysis of the prob- 
lems of peace in the Orient. The author’s proposals in- 
volve: crushing Japan, but giving it a just peace; liberat- 
ing China; promoting self-government in Southeast Asia; 
and ending all preferred political positions and economic 
monopolies in the Far East. One weakness is the inade- 
quate discussion of the Soviet position in this region. 


POREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 30, May 14, 1943. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 


Incorporated. National 


Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRaNK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Luger, Secretary; Vera Micuees Dean, Editor. Envered as 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


one month for change of address on membership publications. 


Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at least 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


Bp» isi 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. 


Washington News Letter 


May 10.—General Enrique Pefiaranda de Castillo, 
50-year-old President of Bolivia who is at present 
the guest of the United States, richly merited the 
warm reception he received in Washington last week. 
On April 7 President Pefiaranda climaxed his series 
of amicable acts toward this country by leading Bo- 
livia into war on the side of the United Nations. 
With the notable exception of Brazil, Bolivia is the 
only South American country so far to have declared 
war on the Axis. 


Before General Pefiaranda became President of 
Bolivia in 1940, relations between his country and 
the United States were far from harmonious. Ameti- 
can influence in that country was slight, as exempli- 
fied by the fact that La Paz was the only Western 
Hemisphere capital without an American bank. 
Loans for this South American republic were floated 
in Wall Street at what Bolivians thought exorbitant 
terms, and were defaulted for the simple reason that 
that poverty-stricken country was in no position to 
meet either principal or interest on the bonds. In 
1937 Bolivia confiscated a $17,000,000 investment 
of the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, which is the 
only case on record outside of Mexico, of Latin 
American expropriation of oil property. This action, 
however, was amicably adjusted in April 1942 by an 
* agreement between Standard Oil and Bolivia. 


GERMAN INFLUENCE WAS STRONG. Mean- 
while, German penetration in Bolivia had developed 
alarmingly. With nearly 8,000 Germans in the re- 
public, German influence was always strong and it 
may be recalled that the Bolivian Army was trained 
by the late Ernst Roehn, Hitler's intimate friend and 
ultimate victim. The country’s aviation was a monop- 
oly in the hands of the German Lloyd Aereo Com- 
pany, which not only served every town and com- 
munity in Bolivia, but maintained a weekly air service 
to Berlin by way of Brazil. 


Since Pefiaranda’s advent to power, the United 
States concluded in 1940 a five-year agreement with 
Bolivia whereby we undertook to purchase 18,000 
tons of tin per year—half the nation’s total produc- 
tion—and in 1941 Washington contracted to buy Bo- 
livia’s total output of tungsten, another critical war 
material, for three years. Today, after the capture of 
Malaya by the Japanese, Bolivia has become the 
United Nations’ most important source of tin. Fur- 
thermore, the Pefiaranda government expropriated 
the Nazi air lines and immediately arranged with 


FOR VICTORY ° 


the Pan-American Grace Company (Panagra) to op. 
erate them. It is not surprising that the Nazis plotted 
a coup d’état to overthrow Pefiaranda, but their con. 
spiracy was discovered by the interception of a letter 
from Major Elias Belmonte, Bolivian Military At 
taché in Berlin, to the German Minister in La Paz. 


TRIUMPH OF “GOOD NEIGHBOR” POLICY. 
President Pefiaranda said in Washington last week 
that Nazi agents were still working in Bolivia, and 
this was demonstrated in December 1942 when they 
tried to exploit labor troubles in the tin mines as an 
example of “Yankee imperialism.” The Pefiaranda 
government frustrated this campaign by inviting U.S. 
experts to collaborate with Bolivians in studying and 
reporting on the labor situation. 

Workers in the Patifio-owned Catavi mines pro- 
ducing for the British asked for a 100 per cent wage 
increase and, when the operators offered them 30 per 
cent, they went on strike. Just before the strike, the 
Bolivian Congress had passed an advanced labor 
code. U.S. Ambassador Pierre Boal asked the La Paz 
government how the new labor laws would effect 
costs of production of tin, antimony, lead and other 
products being bought by this country. In some circles, 
this action was interpreted as an effort to head off 
badly needed labor legislation in Bolivia. 


On April 20 the Joint Commission issued a report, 
recommending among other things that the Bolivian 
government raise the minimum legal wage, and re. 
move the restrictive provisions against free associa- 
tion, particularly labor meetings. It also pointed out 
that education, housing, sanitation and health condi- 
tions must be improved if living standards are to be 
raised. 

The remarkable change in United States-Bolivian 
relations within the span of a few years is signal 
testimony to the success of the Good Neighbor pol- 
icy. The era of “dollar diplomacy” is definitely gone, 
as President Roosevelt indicated on May 7 when he 


revealed that he had apologized to President Pefia- { 


randa for the act of certain United States financiers 15 
years ago in making a loan to the Bolivian govern 
ment at excessive rates. Probably what the President 
has in mind is that the era of private banking loans 
to foreign governments is ended, and that such finan- 
cial operations will be conducted in the future by 
government agencies like the Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation. 
JOHN ELLIOTT 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


