‘ergu- 
{iffiin, 


New 


r ref- 
, pre 

1024 
me of 
fessor 
n 860 
\odern 
1 nar- 
ctober 
1s and 
graph 


Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff 


ETE ap 
oy 
class matter 

2, 1921, at the Post 








PERIODICAL Room Office a New York, 
GENER LIBR N. Y., under the act 
wav. oe —” of March 3, 1879. 








Vou. XVII, No. 20 


MarcH 11, 1938 





—_—_ 


ORIGINS OF SINO-JAPANESE HOSTILITIES 
by T. A. Bisson 
In this report, the author—who has just returned from 
a year in the Far East—describes the rapid development 
of the nationalist movement in China just prior to the 
outbreak of the conflict, the Lukouchiao incident, and 
the fall of Peiping in July 1937. 


March 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


we 


Ann Arbor, Wichiean 


- 


25 cents Y 








—— 





ll SPAIN: OBSTACLE TO ANGLO-ITALIAN ACCORD _ 





a? may prove a difficult stumbling-block in 
the Anglo-Italian conversations, which will soon 
be initiated by the Earl of Perth, British Ambassa- 
dor at Rome. In the program for the discussions out- 
lined by Downing Street, withdrawal of Italian 
troops from the peninsula is understood to be an 
essential point. Negotiations on this subject have 
dragged almost interminably. In accordance with the 
British plan approved by the Non-Intervention Com- 
mittee last November, both parties in Spain were to 
be accorded belligerent rights as soon as a “sub- 
stantial” number of foreign soldiers had been evac- 
uated from Spanish territory. During December and 
January the powers continued to wrangle over what 
total could be regarded as “substantial.” To resolve 
this dispute the British finally advanced a new form- 
ula providing for the withdrawal of a “basic num- 
ber” of foreign fighters from the side which, accord- 
ing to the findings of impartial commissions, had 
fewer ‘‘volunteers.’”” A proportionate number would 
be simultaneously retired from the other side. On the 
commencement of withdrawal, the international con- 
trol over Spain’s land frontiers would be restored 
and a new scheme for the observation of traffic by 
sea inaugurated. No attempt to check the flying of 
foreign warplanes into the country was apparently 
envisaged. Recognition of belligerent rights would 
be accorded as soon as the “‘basic” number of volun- 
teers had been withdrawn. 

On March 2 Russian acceptance “in principle” of 
the British formula seemingly brought agreement 
among all the powers. But meanwhile the Italians 
Were reported to have qualified their former affirma- 
tive action. The British had suggested 20,000 as the 
“basic number”; the Italians would change this to 
10,000. Rome also demanded that land control alone 
be re-established when withdrawal begins, thus leav- 
ing the sea lanes open for an estimated six weeks, 





ee 


during which the fascist powers could continue the 
flow of supplies to General Franco. Premier Juan 
Negrin of the Barcelona government attacked the 
British plan as promising “the strangulation of loyal- 
ist Spain.” 

Adoption of the British formula may lead to ma- 
terial limitation of the number of “volunteers” in 
Spain, thus diminishing one threat to European 
peace. But if belligerent rights are granted to Franco 
unconditionally, the efforts of the Insurgents to en- 
force a legal blockade and interfere with neutral ship- 
ping may give rise to a series of dangerous incidents. 
By this time foreign armament has become a more 
important factor than troops in strengthening the 
Spanish factions. The recapture of Teruel by the In- 
surgents on February 22 was attributed by the Bar- 
celona Cabinet to “the mass of material of German 
and Italian origin,” in possession of their opponents, 
particularly artillery and airplanes. The Nationalist 
victory in the two-month-long battle was a serious 
blow to Loyalist prestige. Its effect was offset to some 
degree by the torpedoing on March 6 of the Baleares, 
one of the two strongest vessels in the Insurgent fleet, 
in a battle with Government warships off Cartagena. 
Following the naval encounter, the Nationalist ships 
were bombed by Loyalist planes. Moreover, two Brit- 
ish destroyers engaged in rescuing survivors from the 
sinking cruiser suffered the loss of one seaman killed 
and three injured. It is not yet clear how decisive 
the victory may prove, but by threatening the Insur- 
gents’ command of the sea, it discouraged their hopes 
of overcoming the stalemate in the field by the ex- 
hausting effects of a blockade. 

Meanwhile, political developments within Loyalist 
Spain have been marked by the rising power of 
Indalecio Prieto, Right-wing Socialist and Minister 
of National Defense, and the loss by the Communist 
party of its former position of predominance. Com- 





ete ee 


oy gn eo 

















munist influence in the army has been progressively 
curbed by decrees issued last summer and fall, for- 
bidding “proselytism” and the use of military posi- 
tions for political ends, and restricting the rdle of 
the political commissars. While some observers re- 
port an opening rift between the Communists and 
the Defense Minister, Prieto continues to cooperate 
with the party, whose social program is, in effect, as 
relatively conservative as his own. Soviet aid, more- 
over, is still essential to the Loyalists. The Com- 
munists on their part give some indications of seek- 
ing the favor of their former enemies, the Anarcho- 
Syndicalists of the C.N.T., who are now demanding 
a place in the government. At the same time nego- 
tiations for closer cooperation are continuing be- 
tween the UGT, the Socialist-Communist labor fed- 
eration, and the CNT. Parallel with these develop- 
ments among proletarian groups, there is some in- 
dication that the strength of Center and middle-class 
parties is growing. The last two sessions of the Cor- 
tes have been attended by a small group of Centrist 
deputies, to the right of the parties in the Popular 
Front. Among them was Portela Valladares, prime 
minister of the government which conducted the 
elections of February 1936. The increasing tendency 
of the authorities to permit religious services—al- 
though these are still held in private—is also cited 
as evidence of growing moderation. These shifting 
trends, however, have apparently not gone far enough 
to threaten a Cabinet change; and all parties are 
united in support of a more intensive war effort. 


CHARLES A. THOMSON 


INDIA TESTS NEW CONSTITUTION 

The first deadlock to arise under the new Indian 
constitution, inaugurated in April 1937, was success- 
fully resolved on February 25, when the ministries 
of Bihar and the United Provinces returned to office. 
These ministries, formed by Congress party major- 
ities in the legislatures, had resigned on February 15, 
after the British Governors of the two provinces— 
supported by the Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow—had re- 
fused to permit the wholesale release of some forty 
political prisoners. When the Congress party as- 
sembled several days later at Haripura for its annual 
meeting, Mahatma Gandhi predicted similar resigna- 
tions in other provinces and the newly elected pres- 
ident, Subhas C. Bose, threatened the renewal of civil 
disobedience throughout India. Lord Linlithgow in- 
tervened on February 22 with a compromise, by 
which the Governors would accept the advice of the 
ministries regarding the release of these prisoners 
only after individual examination of each case. 
Acceptance of this formula by Congress party lead- 
ers allowed the two ministries to resume power im- 
mediately. 

Freedom for political prisoners has been a source 


Page Two = — 








eee 
ee 


of controversy during the eleven months in which 
the Government of India Act, passed by the British 
Parliament in 1935, has been operative. Followi 
the elections held in January and February of las 
year, when the Congress party won majorities in six 
provinces and pluralities in three others, its leaders 
refused to form ministries until the British off. 
cials promised not to interfere in provincial legisla. 
tion and administration.* The Viceroy and Govern. 
ors, unwilling to tie their hands, maintained tha 
they could not legally relinquish the emergency poy. 
ers granted by the Act. In July a working compro. 
mise was effected by Lord Linlithgow and Gandhi, 
by which the Governors agreed not to interven 
“capriciously” or in “day to day” administration, 
The Congress party then formed cabinets in seven 
provinces. The release of political prisoners las 
month, which the ministries in Bihar and the United 
Provinces considered ‘“‘day to day” routine, was ye 
toed by the Governors on the grounds that it jeopay 
dized law and order throughout India and lent sup 
port to terrorism in Bengal. 

Although the settlement of this crisis has tem 
porarily eased the tension between the nationalist 
movement and the British government, the conflic 
over Indian independence continues unabated and 
has contributed to the postponement of the Corona 
tion Durbar of King George VI which was sched 
uled for next winter. The Congress party violently 
opposes the second part of the new constitution, not 
yet in effect, which provides for federation of the 
native states with the eleven British provinces, and 
the establishment of a central legislature representing 
both areas. The nationalists contend that federation 
will strengthen the rule of the native princes, whos 
feudal states often permit despotism, and will check 
the growth of democracy and social welfare in the 
provinces. The prospect of federation is likewise ut 
popular with the native princes, who have been bat 
gaining with the Viceroy for guarantees that their 
prerogatives will not be diminished under the new 
scheme. The proposed federal legislature is under 
Congress party fire on the ground that its member 
ship is designed to favor British rather than Indias 
rule. 

The fate of federation and a central legislature 
remains uncertain, for the powerful Congress patty 
leaders are determined to defeat any obstacles to ul: 
timate independence. Under the constitutional pro 
visions for the new federal government, the Viceroy 
would retain his control of national defense, foreign 
affairs, and ecclesiastical affairs, and his emergeng 
powers in civil administration and finance. Thest 
checks on the federal executive and the safeguard 


ing provisions which would make nationalist contfo 
(Continued on Page 4) 





*Cf. Foreign Policy Bulletin, April 9, 1937. 











1 and 
yrona- 
sched- 
lently 
n, not 
of the 
s, and 
enting 
ration 
whose 
check 
in the 
ise Un 
n. bat: 
t their 
e new 
under 
embet- 
Indias 


slature 
$ party 
; to ul- 
al pro- 
 iceroy 
foreign 
>rgencd 
These 
-ouard: 
jae 





Washington News Letter 

















, ——, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


MarcH 8—Washington observers who have been 
seeking to discover what the navy is for were given 
two significant answers to their question last week. 
One answer was submitted by the House Naval Af- 
fairs Committee on March 5, in the form of a major- 
ity report recommending prompt enactment of the 
Administration’s $1,121,000,000 naval expansion 
bill. The second answer was provided by President 
Roosevelt on the same day in an executive order as- 
serting a formal claim to sovereignty over two tiny 
islands in the Central Pacific ocean. 


To members of Congress who feared that the 
naval program was designed to support a new “ac- 
tive” foreign policy in the Far East, the report of 
the Naval Affairs Committee was reassuring. The 
twenty-two committee members who signed the ma- 
jority report declared emphatically that the expan- 
sion program “‘is not for the purpose of policing the 
world or to make the world safe for democracy” but 
“solely for the purpose of affording an adequate de- 
fense for the continental United States and its pos- 
sessions."” The committee emphasized the testimony 
of Admiral Leahy that the 20 per cent increase was 
not sufficient to permit aggressive naval operations 
on the other side of the Pacific. Adhering to the tra- 
ditional doctrine of sea power, the committee justi- 
fied the request for 46 new combat ships on the 
ground that even a defensive navy “must be suffici- 
ently strong to defeat the navy of a possible enemy 
... at a distance from our coast.” It must also be 
stony cuough to “keep open the lines of supply” to 
outlying possessions. But without an alliance with 
any other power, the committee was compelled to 
admit that its recommended increase would not, in 
fact, be sufficient to defend the Philippines or to 
upport American interests in the Far East against 
ny hostile power able to control the seas in the 
Western Pacific. 


The assertion of sovereignty over the Pacific 
islands, while not in open conflict with the report of 
the Naval Affairs Committee, clearly extends the 
broad definition of “adequate defense” and under- 
lines the far-reaching importance of air power on 
the naval strategy of the Pacific area. The interest 
of the United States in the small unoccupied coral 
atolls of the Central Pacific was reawakened several 
years ago when the advance of commercial aviation 
led to an intensive search for air bases on the route 


to Manila and Australia. Three islands lying between 
Hawaii and American Samoa—Howland, Baker and 
Jarvis—were claimed by the United States in 1934 
despite the fact that Great Britain’s assertion of sov- 
ereignty had not previously been questioned. Canton 
and Enderbury, the two islets named in the Presi- 
dent’s executive order last week, are about 200 miles 
south of Baker and Jarvis in the Phoenix group, also 
claimed but not occupied until recently by the British. 

Under international law, discovery alone is not 
considered sufficient to establish a base of sover- 
eignty. Nevertheless, it was learned last week that 
State Department officials have been searching early 
records which prove that these and other Pacific 
islands were discovered by American whalers be- 
tween 1789 and 1830. To bolster this rather doubt- 
ful claim, Washington officials point to an American 
scientific expedition which visited Canton Island last 
August, leaving a concrete marker bearing the Amer- 
ican flag as evidence of American occupancy. At the 
same time British scientists also landed on Canton 
for the ostensible purpose of viewing a solar eclipse. 
This week it was learned in Washington that another 
American expedition, fitted: out secretly in Hawaii, 
has just occupied both Enderbury and Canton Islands 
and reported its arrival by radio to the Navy Depart- 
ment in Washington. The American claims have 
been pressed with London in formal negotiations ex- 
tending over the past year. 

The strategic importance of these potential air 
bases is not minimized by President Roosevelt's de- 
nial that any motive other than the interests of com- 
mercial aviation lies behind the claim to sovereignty. 
The value of the islands lies in their utility as aids 
to the maintenance of naval communications along 
the new line of defense extending from Hawaii to 
Samoa. Capable of being used for submarines as well 
as airplanes, the islands would provide a protective 
screen between the Japanese mandated islands and 
American Samoa. Should the United States eventu- 
ally decide to establish a fortified naval base in the 
Philippines, an effective line of communication might 
be maintained from Samoa through the British Far 
Eastern possessions to Manila. And should the possi- 
bility of joint Anglo-American naval operations in 
the Pacific be revived, possession of Pacific air bases 
would greatly improve the American position. 

Thus of the two answers to the question—“What 
is the navy for?’”"—most Washington observers agree 
that the implications of the second outweigh the dis- 
claimers of the first. WILLIAM T. STONE 




















INDIA TESTS NEW CONSTITUTION 
(Continued from Page 2) 

of the federal legislature almost impossible have 
rendered the new constitution unpalatable to the 
Congress party. Lord Lothian, influential British 
statesman and expert on Indian affairs, has been 
making informal suggestions to the party leaders to 
accept the constitution as an experiment in self-rule, 
in order to complete the unification of India, but his 
conversations with Gandhi and others have not yet 
proved successful. As a concession to the indepen- 
dence spirit, the British government has decided to 
allow India to keep its annual £500,000 contribution 
to Empire defense, the sum to be used for an Indian 
fleet of six warships. 

The success of the Congress party in the provinces 
has accentuated division of counsel within its leader- 
ship and strengthened the left-wing control of Pandit 
Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Bose. Needing the 
support of those peasants whose newly gained fran- 


Page Four 








a 
— 


chise makes them important in political calculations, 
the socialist group is attacking the money lenders, 
landlords, and industrialists, many of whom su 
ported Gandhi in his opposition to British rule. By 
combining the campaign against “British exploita- 
tion” with a campaign against “Indian exploitation,” 
Nehru and Bose hope to transform the Congress 
party into an effective socialist movement. 

Like all opposition parties which suddenly obtain 
power, the seven nationalist ministries are finding 
the fulfillment of campaign pledges unexpectedly 
difficult, but are attempting gradually to introduce 
the promised social and economic reforms. The Bom- 
bay legislature is debating a bill to restrict usury, 
and Madras has initiated prohibition of alcoholic 
beverages in one district. If the spirit of compromise 
continues, it is probable that provisional self-govern- 
ment will offer valuable opportunity for the growth 
of democratic institutions. 

JAMES FREDERICK GREEN 





The F.DP.A. Bookshelf 


The Spanish Cockpit, by Franz Borkenau. London, Faber 
and Faber, 1937. 12s. 6d. 

A sociologist attempts “a descriptive scientific field- 
study of events” in Spain, based on two visits—in the late 
summer of 1936 and the first two months of 1937. His 
findings provide the most objective and fundamental analy- 
sis yet published in English of political and social align- 
ments in the Loyalist area. Particularly revealing is his 
discussion of the réle played by Communist influence. 


Goliath: The March of Fascism, by G. A. Borgese. New 
York, Viking Press, 1937. $3.00 


One of the most distinguished novelists and literary 
critics of modern Italy devotes his great powers of crea- 
tive writing, tempered by truly Italian irony, to a pene- 
trating study of the origins and nature of Fascism. Draw- 
ing on rich resources of literary and political insight, he 
paints an unforgettable portrait of the Italian people who, 
in his opinion, have suffered in modern history from a 
feeling of discrepancy between their military power and 
their self-appointed réle of inheritors of the Roman em- 
pire. Moved by pity rather than anger—except for some 
vitriolic pages on Mussolini—he indicts the Italians more 
than their Duce, in the belief that dictatorship has its 
roots not in the power of the ruler but in the acquiescence 
of the ruled. 


The House that Hitler Built, by Stephen H. Roberts. New 
York, Harper, 1938. $3.00 
A remarkably objective and well-written study of con- 
temporary Germany by an Australian scholar who spent 
sixteen months in travel and interviews. Professor Rob- 
erts provides lively descriptions of the Nazi leaders and 


’ their party machinery, as well as enthusiastic accounts 


of the youth and labor organizations. Although crediting 
National Socialism with revival of the national morale, 
he asserts that present trends lead to war or economic 
collapse. 


Must We Go To War? by Kirby Page. 
and Rinehart, 1937. $1.00 


An affirmative answer to this question will be necessary, 
Mr. Page declares, if the present confusion in American 
foreign policy continues. Ridiculing the “morality” of the 
democratic nations, he urges enforcement of our neutral- 
ity legislation and withdrawal of our armed forces in the 
Far East. Although verbose and uneven in spots, the book 
presents a stimulating summary of the pacifist-socialist 
position. 


New York, Farrar 


The Peoples Want Peace, by Elias Tobenkin. New York, 
Putnam, 1938. $2.75 
Prelude to Peace, by Henry A. Atkinson. New York, 


Harper, 1937. $2.00 


Two persuasively written but overly simplified solutions of 
the problem of peace. On the basis of interviews with states- 
men and citizens in fifteen different countries, Mr. Tobenkin 
concludes that militaristic governments will soon give way 
before the desire for peace among the common people, 
especially the younger generation. Asserting that re 
ligious idealism is necessary to create a peaceful world 
community, Dr. Atkinson urges the replacement of state 
sovereignty and excessive nationalism by a League of 
Nations with effective sanctions. Both volumes contam 
brief bibliographies, that of Dr. Atkinson being completely 
unorganized, and indexes. 


Armaments Year-Book. Geneva, League of Nations, 1937, 
$6.25 


This is the thirteenth edition of a handbook unique in 
its scope and accuracy. Despite the growing difficulty of 
obtaining complete information, the Disarmament Section 
of the League presents a mass of carefully gleaned data 
on the armed forces and military expenditures of 64 na 
tions, in which the pace of the current arms race 3 
clearly mirrored. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 20, Marcu 11, 1938. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RayMonp Lgsiig Bug, President; Vera MicHe.es Dean, Editor. 
December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


National 
Entered as second-class mattef 
Two Dollars a Year. 


F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 








\\ 


ni 
tic 
to 


Fa 





