—_lfOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


eeengisigive” of current international events by the Research Staff 


for con. 
itration 
‘Ontracts 
1 Virtual 
r restric. 
id fire”; 
delegate 
ts when 
»f a fac. 
r of the 
t is not, 
e, repre. 
| govern- 
1 Parlia- 
| bitterly 
to meet 


ed coun- 
increase 
var min- 
under a 
ef. And 
e fascist 
obtained 
a fairly 
£ collec. 
tatement 
pensable 
a hollow 
ligations 
co-Soviet 
rominent 
olicy, an 
f French 
cornfully 


$ toward 
oad, will 
lains un- 
immated 
t, France 
oor after 
vhich the 
»ponents. 


'OPPER 


Harrison. 


-Irish re- 
| jumbled 


i. National 
l-class matter 


AL LIBRARY Subscription, Two Dollars a Year 


1c. 
. oF - fSiziGNn POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 


You. XVII, No. 22 


MarcyH 25, 1938 


— 


STRIFE IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA 
by Karl Falk 


The German minority question in Czechoslovakia has 
assumed international proportions. This report analyzes 
the post-war political development of Czechoslovakia, 
the economic aspects of the Sudetic problem, the mil- 
itary restrictions imposed by the new Law for the De- 
fense of the State, and the social and cultural grievances 
of the German minority. 


March 15 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


— 
——— 


25 cents 


fal 


AR a8 193 


Entered as second- 
class matter December 
2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., under the act 
of March 3, 1879. 


M 


General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor. Michican 


oe 


EUROPE RESTS IN 


UNEASY PEACE 


— is again breathing more easily. The 
immediate crisis provoked by Hitler's dramatic 
action in Austria has disappeared with the reluctant 
acceptance of Amschluss; the danger of a Polish- 
Lithuanian war has subsided as suddenly as it arose; 
and the development of a critical situation in Spain 
has been at least temporarily arrested with the halt 
in General Franco's successful drive on the Aragon 
Front. Yet the continent remains deeply perturbed. 
In Austria and Lithuania peace has once more been 
purchased with concessions to force; and in Spain 
the apostles of fascism may shortly celebrate a new 
triumph. 

While peace hung in the balance in northeastern 
Europe, Nationalist victories in Spain almost precipi- 
tated another crisis. After the recapture of Teruel, 
the Insurgents launched their long-heralded cam- 
paign to sever Catalonia from the rest of Loyalist 
Spain. Driving the largely demoralized government 
| forces before them, the Rebel troops advanced some 
$0 miles in a 12-day offensive. The campaign was 
punctuated by intense and relentless air attacks on 
Barcelona, costing no less than 1,300 lives. The po- 
sition of the Loyalists became so desperate that 
Premier Juan Negrin flew to Paris on March 15 to 
plead with the French government for immediate 
assistance. Despite the alarm aroused in Paris by the 
imminence of a fascist victory in Spain, the govern- 
ment declined to assume the risk involved in official 
intervention, especially since London refused to sup- 
port it. In Britain Prime Minister Chamberlain re- 
iterated on March 16 his determination to adhere to 
acourse of non-intervention. Except in the unlikely 
event that the French can prevail on Britain to change 
its stand, the Loyalists will have to fight their own 
battles against overwhelming odds. At present Loy- 
alist troops have again rallied, while Franco’s army 
ptepares to enter more difficult terrain. Although 


the government's cause is not hopeless, the ultimate 
creation of a fascist or semi-fascist Spain is becoming 
daily more likely. Such a development will mark one 
more defeat for the democratic powers of Europe, 
even if a Nationalist Spain does not prove as amen- 
able to German and Italian influence as some foreign 
observers predict. 


Meanwhile, coordination of Austria with the 
Third Reich has been proceeding apace. The theatres, 
the professions and the civil service are being rapidly 
purged of non-Aryans. With equal ruthlessness, all 
Jewish shops have been branded. The secret police 
of Heinrich Himmler have made thousands of ar- 
rests. Many prominent people, including Major Emil 
Fey and Baron Neustaedter-Stuermer, have preferred 
suicide to falling into the clutches of the Nazis. 
Thousands of German police and troops are making 
Austria thoroughly “reliable” for the coming 
plebiscite. Dr. Schacht and Wilhelm Keppler are 
attending to the economic aspects of Austro-German 
union, taking over the assets of the Austrian Na- 
tional Bank and introducing into the new German 
state the Reich’s Four-Year Plan and all its compli- 
cated controls over business and agriculture. No 
doubt they have discovered that Austria, with its 
import surplus of 237.1 million schillings, is an eco- 
nomic liability rather than an asset. Although Austria 
can provide Germany with some iron and lumber, 
it will on the whole aggravate instead of relieve 
the Reich’s chronic shortage of foodstuffs and raw 
materials. 

On April 10 the Reich Germans as well as the 
Austrians will march to the polls to put the stamp of 
approval on Anschluss and elect the members of a 
new Reichstag. Such was the decision announced to 
the Reichstag on March 18 by the Fuehrer, who was 
hailed throughout the Reich as a conquering hero. 
Anschluss, Hitler declared, had been carried out only 


to give Austria the right of self-determination and 
save it “from the fate of Spain.” “Behind my de- 
cision,” he warned, ‘stand 75,000,000 people pro- 
tected by the German Army.” 


Hitler conspicuously failed to give any assurances 
concerning Czechoslovakia. Probably he is planning 
no Overt act against this country in the near future. 
Not only is he at present occupied with the consoli- 
dation of the enlarged German Reich, but any action 
against Czechoslovakia at this time might drive the 
hesitating British government definitely into the 
anti-German camp. Yet the creation of a middle 
European federation, including Czechoslovakia, is 
undoubtedly one of Hitler’s objectives. To this end, 
he will press Prague to abandon its alliance with Mos- 
cow and tempt the Czechs with economic conces- 
sions. The Czechoslovak government will not suc- 
cumb to this pressure or these blandishments unless 
deprived of all foreign support. It has already indi- 
cated, however, its desire to conciliate the Germans. 
In accordance with promises made more than a year 
ago, it decided on March 19 to introduce into Parlia- 
ment legislation designed to insure the German mi- 
nority of 3,250,000 proportional representation in 
the state and municipal civil service. 


The last two weeks have shown no progress to- 
ward the formation of a European front which 
would impede Germany's rise to a position of hegem- 
ony on the continent. When the Soviet government 
proposed on March 18 that “peace-loving” countries 
confer on measures to be taken against aggression, 
its suggestion met with a frigid reception. London 
is still reluctant to follow the example of Paris and 
Moscow and tender Czechoslovakia a pledge of mili- 
tary assistance in case of attack. On March 16 Prime 
Minister Chamberlain once more refused in the 
House of Commons to be “rushed into making an- 
nounce;nents prematurely.” Despite undoubted dis- 
appointment over events in Austria, Mussolini clearly 
indicated in a speech before the Chamber of Depu- 
ties on March 16 that he would continue to march 
with Germany. Now that he has paid his price to 
Hitler, Il Duce will try to use the Rome-Berlin axis 
for his own purposes. 


Under these circumstances the reluctance of the 
British to build up an anti-German front can be un- 
derstood. Such a course might bring peace temporar- 
ily, but it might also precipitate war. The conviction 
is growing that the opportunity for effective collective 
action has now passed. The British government there- 
fore prefers to pursue a policy of “watchful waiting.” 
It will vigorously prosecute its rearmament program 
and strive for an understanding with Italy, hoping 
meanwhile, against long odds, that an oppor- 
tunity for a general European settlement will appear. 


JOHN C. DEWILDE 


Page Two 


| 


LITHUANIA YIELDS TO POLAND 


Profiting from the crisis ‘precipitated by Hitler's 
seizure of Austria, Poland has suddenly compelled 
Lithuania to restore diplomatic and trade relations 
and communication services which had been sys. 
pended for more than 17 years. On October 10, 1929 
the Polish General Zeligowski had, without ay. 
thorization from his government, invaded Lithuania 
and taken control of about one-third of its territory, 
including Vilna, the capital city. Lithuania had then 
broken off diplomatic relations and closed the fron. 
tier to traffic of all kinds. Despite Polish threats and 
appeals to the League, this decision had never been 
modified. 

The shooting of a Polish sentry on the Lithuanian 
side of the frontier on March 11, 1938 provided ap 


occasion for the new demands of the Polish gover. | speech 


ment. On March 17 Warsaw delivered a six-point |! 


ultimatum to the Lithuanian Minister at Tallinn, 
Estonia, threatening military invasion if its terms 
were not accepted within 48 hours. These included 
the establishment by March 31 of diplomatic rela- 
tions and the restoration of railroad, postal, tele. 
phone and telegraph services; abrogation of a para- 
graph in Lithuania’s new constitution referring to 
Vilna as its capital; conclusion of a minorities agree. 
ment and a commercial treaty; and complete satis- 
faction for the killing of the Polish frontier guard. 

On March 18 Polish troops, which ultimately 
numbered about 80,000 men, were moved up to the 
frontier while warships held maneuvers near the 
port of Memel. Wildly patriotic crowds in Polish 
cities called for, invasion of Lithuania. Lithuania, 
with an army of only 20,000, pleaded in vain for out- 
side assistance. The Soviet Union refused to give aid 
and Lithuania’s partners in the Baltic Entente, 
Estonia and Latvia, urged acceptance of the uli: 
matum. Before delivery of the ultimatum, France 
Britain, and the Soviet Union apparently induced 
Warsaw to moderate its terms. Later, they secured 4 
12-hour extension of the time limit. 

A most disquieting factor was the possibility that 
drastic Polish moves toward Lithuania would be sup- 
ported by Germany. Ever since the conclusion of the 
German-Polish non-aggression pact in 1934, it had 
been feared that the two countries would sometime 
compose their basic difference over the Polish Cor 
ridor by a deal at Lithuania’s expense. One possible 
bargain, commonly mentioned, would permit Poland 
to absorb Lithuania, gaining a new outlet to the sea 
at Memel, in return for surrendering the Polish Cor 
ridor to Germany. Reports from Berlin, which was 
apparently surprised by the Polish steps, indicated 
that Germany might seize Danzig or Memel in case 
Poland invaded Lithuania. Fears that a general un- 
derstanding existed between the two governments 


(Continued on Page 4) 


careful’ 
Bast. 
mental! 
on “ju 
would 
not pr 
events 
at hon 
ing on 
six me 
Congr 
specifi 
3 


~_ — ~*~ & re me WY 


The 
vance: 
adopt 
bya v 
tion ¢ 
of An 
vote 
Vinsc 
tectio 
was s 

Me 
the n 
lepea 
the r 


—=5 
) 


Hitler's 
mpelled 
elations 
en sus. 
10, 1920 
out au- 
ithuania 
‘erritory, 
1ad then 
he fron. 
eats and 
ver been 


thuanian 
vided an 
govern 
SiX-point 
Tallinn, 
ts terms 
included 
utic rela. 
tal, tele. 
E a para- 
ring to 
es agree 
ete satis- 
rt guard. 
ltimately 
1p to the 
near the 
n Polish 
ithuania, 
1 for out 
) give aid 
Entente, 
the ulti- 
, France, 
induced 
secured 4 


ility that 
d be sup- 
on of the 
4, it had 
sometime 
lish Cor: 
> possible 
it Poland 
‘o the sea 
lish Cor- 
rhich was 
indicated 
el in case 
‘neral uf- 
yernments 


Washington News Letter 


VO 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


MarRcH 22—Those Washington observers who 
have been asking whether President Roosevelt's 
famous Chicago speech represented “‘an attitude or 
aprogram” found an answer last week in Secretary 
Hull’s forceful statement of American foreign policy 
und the accompanying march toward passage of the 
naval expansion program in the House. 

An attitude plus a program. In his important 
speech at the National Press Club on March 17, Mr. 
Hull was speaking primarily to Congress and Ameri- 
an public opinion, though his words were weighed 
arefully for their effect in both Europe and the Far 
fast. What he said, in effect, was that the funda- 
mental principles of American foreign policy, based 
m “justice and morality and peace among nations,” 
would not be abandoned; that the United States did 
not propose to beat a retreat in the face of disruptive 
wents abroad or isolationist and pacifist sentiment 
athome; and that the Executive had been proceed- 
ing on the basis of a definite program for the past 
ix months. That program, Mr. Hull informed his 
Congressional critics, was embodied in the following 
specific points: 

1. The willingness of this government “to exchange in- 

formation” with other governments having “common 
interests and common objectives” and “to proceed 


along parallel lines” while retaining independence 
of judgment and freedom of action. 


2. Determination to pursue “the practice of civilized 
nations to afford protection, by appropriate means 
under the rule of reason, to their nationals and 

their rights and interests abroad.” 


Derermination not to “abandon our nationals and our 
interests in China.” 

4, Determination to maintain armed forces to provide 

“adequate means of security” against attack. 

The last point in Mr. Hull’s program was ad- 
vanced another step on March 21 when the House 
adopted the billion dollar naval expansion program 
bya vote of 291 to 100, but without any clear defini- 
tion of how the navy is to be used as an instrument 
of American policy. In the debate preceding the final 
vote the “policy amendment” introduced by Mr. 
Vinson, authorizing a navy capable of affording pro- 
tection ‘‘in both oceans at one and the same time,” 
was stricken out. 


Moves to repeal Neutrality Act. Indications that 
the next step in the program may include a move to 
tepeal or amend the Neutrality Act were found in 
the report that the Foreign Affairs Committee of 


the House will soon begin hearings on a number of 
resolutions now before Congress. While the Admin- 
istration has not publicly endorsed any of the pend- 
ing measures, sponsors of resolutions assert that 
the State Department favors such hearings to test 
Congressional sentiment on the existing Act. Among 
other measures which will be considered are the 
O’Connell resolution, which authorizes the President 
to forbid the export of arms or any other “articles 
or materials’ to an aggressor state “whenever the 
President shall find that an act of aggression has 


been committed,” and the Biermann resolution, de- 
signed to give effect to the non-recognition doctrine. 
The latter empowers the President, “in consultation 


with other states signatory to the Kellogg-Briand 
Pact,” to prohibit “financial transactions” with any 
state violating the anti-war pact. While definitive 
action on neutrality legislation appears most unlikely 
at this session, the hearings will extend the current 
debate on foreign policy. 

Still another indication of the drive against the 
“seclusionist’’ point of view was the significant decla- 
ration of Paul V. McNutt, High Commissioner to 
the Philippines, that the whole question of Philip- 
pine independence “should be re-examined in the 
light of recent disquieting world events.” Adminis- 
tration spokesmen deny that the High Commis- 
sioner’s speech, which was broadcast over a nation- 
wide network on March 14, was intended as a trial 
balloon, but few observers here believe that it could 
have been made without the knowledge of the White 
House. In private conversations in Washington dur- 
ing the past few weeks, Mr. McNutt has made no 
secret of the fact that he believes Philippine inde- 
pendence would be a “tragedy” for both the United 
States and the Islands themselves. 


Mexican oil dispute. The obvious reluctance of 
the State Department to intervene in the dispute 
between 17 American and British petroleum com- 
panies and the Mexican government gives further 
evidence of the political importance attached to main- 
taining pan-American friendship and understanding at 
almost any cost. Throughout the controversy, brought 
to a head by the Mexican Supreme Court’s wage- 
scale decision and the occupation of American 
petroleum properties by Mexican oil workers, State 
Department officials have steadfastly declined to ex- 
press any opinion on the merits or demerits of the 
oil companies’ case or the position taken by the 
Cardenas government. The calm, unruffled manner 
with which Department officials are dealing with the 


controversy is in striking contrast to the vigorous 
protests lodged against the Mexican government in 
the land and oil opus in 1927. Whatever decision 
may be taken after a review of all the facts in dis- 
, the attitude of Washington will be governed 
iy the practical necessity of upholding the Good 
Neighbor policy in this hemisphere. 
Witt T. STONE 
LITHUANIA YIELDS TO POLAND 
(Continued from Page 2) 
were strengthened by the attitude of the German 
government which, though it counselled moderation, 
gave no hint of anxiety over the Polish moves. 

In these circumstances, the Lithuanian government 
accepted the Polish demands on March 19. Two days 
later, a Polish diplomatic agent was sent to Kaunas 
to arrange for the exchange of permanent diplomatic 
representatives. Although the immediate danger of 
war seems past, large bodies of Polish troops still 
remain at the frontier, and Lithuanians resent bit- 
terly the pressure to which they are being subjected. 
Two Ministers have already tendered their resigna- 
tions, and it seems possible that the President and 
his entire Cabinet may be forced to retire. Extremely 


Page Four 


—e 


difficult negotiations over communications and trade 
lie immediately ahead. Whether they can be con. 
cluded without an explosion will depend largely op 
actual Polish aims, the exact nature of whic 
has not yet been disclosed. Widespread suspicions 
exist that the Warsaw government will press further 
demands on Lithuania, looking toward an eventual 
partitioning agreement with Germany. On the other 
hand, it may attempt to consolidate a neutral bloc 
of buffer states lying between Germany and the §o. 
viet Union. In any case, Moscow’s failure to assist 
Lithuania apparently means that this country has 
been drawn somewhat further from its orbit and will 
now be more exposed to Polish and German influence 


than in the past. PAUL B. TAYLOR 


MRS. DEAN IN MINNESOTA 


During March Mrs. Dean has been lecturing, 
under the auspices of the Kellogg Foundation, at 
Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota. On March} 
she addressed the Cincinnati branch of the FPA, and 
on March 29 and 30 will speak before the St. Paul 
and Minneapolis branches, returning to New York 
the first of April. 


The F.D.A. Bookshelf 


The French War Machine, by Shelby Cullom Davis. New 
York, Peter Smith, 1937. $2.25 


A sober history of the organization and development of 
the French defenses under the Third Republic, which fills 
an important niche in current military literature. The 
information on France’s colonial troops is particularly 
interesting. 


Catalonia Infeliz, by E. Allison Peers. New York, Oxford 

University Press, 1938. $3.00 

The leading English authority on Catalonia, previously 
author of The Spanish Tragedy, presents a scholarly, his- 
torical review of the region, from its infancy in the ninth 
century, through its rise and fall as a medieval nation, the 
subsequent rebirth of sentiment for cultural and political 
independence, and the final capture of autonomy. Pro- 
fessor Peer’s conservative leanings markedly influence his 


account of recent happenings—between 1931 and the sum- 
mer of 1937. 


What Every Young Man Should Know About War, by 
yy Shapiro. New York, Knight Publishers, 
1937. $1.50 


A question-and-answer compilation of medical informa- 
tion regarding modern warfare, definitely proving that 
Sherman was right. 


Handbook of International Organizations (Associations, 
Bureaux, Committees, etc.). Geneva, League of Na- 
tions, 1938. Distributed by Columbia University Press, 
New York. $3.00 


A useful index to international groups working in fif- 
teen various fields, such as international relations, re- 
ligion, education, medicine, labor, agriculture and law. 


Chiang Kai-shek: Soldier and Statesman, by Hollington 
K. Tong. Shanghai, China Publishing Company, 193%. 
2 vols. 


Strong Man of China, by Robert Berkov. Boston, Hough. 
ton Mifflin, 1938. $3.00 


Hollington Tong’s authorized biography of Generalis 
simo Chiang is also a history of three decades of China's 
political development. Its voluminous material, including 
lengthy documentary quotations, makes it a necessary 
reference work. Berkov’s effort, while much slighter in 
content, is more readable. His analysis of the crucial 
turning points in Chiang’s career may be profitably com- 
pared with that of the authorized version. Neither work 
meets the requirements of a standard biography; the first 
is too uncritical, while the second is too incomplete. 


The Invasion of China by the Western World, by E. B 
Hughes. New York, Macmillan, 1938. $3.50 


This careful study is restricted to the cultural impact 
of the West on China, excluding the influence of business, 
trade and industry. The wide use of Chinese sources 
makes it a peculiarly revealing account of the changes 
brought about in China’s religious, educational, scientifit 
and literary life during the past century. 


The Story of Dictatorship, by E. E. Kellett. 
Dutton, 1937. $1.75 


A spirited account of the rise of dictators throughout 
human history from Abimelech to Hitler. Arguing that 
tyranny is fostered by social unrest, government incom 
petence and war, Mr. Kellett favors improving the m& 
chinery of democracy. 


New York, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 22, Marcu 25, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. Raymonp Lasiim Bug, President; Vera Micuetes Dean, Editor. 


National 
Entered as second-class mattel 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 


| 


sibilit 
memt 
tenan: 
“whe: 
tions 

decla: 


Ine 
pronot 
the bo 
who v 
immec 
two c 
associ 
woven 
erty ai 
Here, 
cannc 
flicts 
As 
Britis 
fluen 


