Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 


FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. 


VoL. XXIV, No. 8 


DECEMBER 8, 1944 


U.S. MOVES TO AID ECONOMY OF POSTWAR BRITAIN 


"[ BE basic principles on which Anglo-American 

trade relations will proceed in the post-war period 
have been greatly clarified in the past few weeks. 
On November 30 it was announced in Washington 
and London that the two governments had reached 
an agreement on the immediate issues of the nature 
and extent of lend-lease aid to be granted to Britain 
in 1945—a short-term agreement which will be of 
the utmost importance in laying the foundation for 
future economic cooperation. This joint statement 
follows on President Roosevelt's proposal, in the 
quarterly lend-lease report to Congress of November 
24, that lend-lease aid to Britain cease after the war. 


PHASE II OF LEND-LEASE. Details of the 
agreement indicate that lend-lease aid to Britain 
and ‘reverse’ lend-lease will be adjusted to meet 
(1) the new conditions presented by Germany's 
downfall, (2) the continued war against Japan, and 
(3) the reconversion needs of the two countries with 
a view to avoiding disastrous consequences for the 
economy of either. Under these arrangements, lend- 
lease aid will be reduced by 43 per cent, thus pro- 
viding $2,700,000,000 for munitions and $2,800,000,- 
000 for non-munitions items. Some of these provi- 
sions become effective on January 1, 1945; others, 
with the defeat of Germany or the enactment of a 
new lend-lease appropriation for June 1, 1945. 

While the 43 per cent reduction in lend-lease aid 
to Britain for the period immediately ahead provides 
a significant commentary on the progress of the 
war, it is the broader frame of reference within 
which the reduction is made that is most important. 
On September 10, 1941 British policy with respect 
to the disposal of lend-lease goods was formulated 
in a White Paper which precluded commercial ex- 
port of “‘articles received under lend-lease.” The 
present agreement in no way invalidates that policy, 
announced unilaterally; but it will now be possible 
for Britain to arrange for commercial imports which 


may be reprocessed for its export trade. Thus, after 
1945 ao shipments to Britain of any manufactured 
goods for civilian use which enter into the export 
trade, nor raw materials,nor semi-fabricated materials 
such as iron, steel and some nonferrous metals, will 
be made under lend-lease. In recognition, however, 
of Britain’s domestic needs as it enters the sixth year 
of a war which has so greatly strained its physical 
and moral resources, future lend-lease shipments will 
include housing materials, completely prefabricated 
homes and foodstuffs. In this connection a White 
Paper published on November 28 reveals heretofore 
secret statistics which seek to demonstrate that, on 
the basis of its population, the British war effort has 
been greater than that of any other belligerent. The 
new lend-lease agreement recognizes this situation, 
and “expresses in some measure the common bond 
which has carried our countries through the hard 
days of the war to approaching victory.” 

EXPORTS VITAL TO BRITAIN. American and 
British officials, after weeks of negotiation, have thus 
reached an agreement which not only recognizes 
Britain’s vital interest in reviving its export trade 
but lays plans for reconversion in both countries on 
a percentage basis so that there will be no “undue 
competitive advantage’ for the exporters of either 
nation. This arrangement should allay the anxiety 
expressed by many Britishers that our desire for an 
expanded export market would tend to nullify Brit- 
ain’s hope for economic stability after the war. 

These fears have been at the root of much mis- 
understanding with regard to future Anglo-Amer- 
ican trade relations. The degree of pessimism that 
had developed among the British on this subject was 
reflected in the urgent plea for cooperation in eco- 
nomic affairs which the British Ambassador, Lord 
Halifax, felt required to make in his speech to the 
Investment Bankers of America in Chicago on No- 
vember 28, when he described Britain’s present finan- 


cial position and its vital interest in export trade. 
Since 1939 Britain has incurred overseas debts double 
the amount of previous overseas investments and its 
export trade has decreased by over two-thirds in vol- 
ume and over 50 per cent in value. At the end of 
the war and even before, Britain’s first necessity will 
be the revival of this trade in order to maintain its 
balance of payments and its standard of living. The 
public demand for a decent standard of living, now 
crystallized in various plans to achieve full employ- 
ment, has become a paramount factor in all public 
policy—domestic or foreign. As Lord Halifax point- 
ed out, the essential exports can be made again only 
if Britain can import raw materials for its factories 
and foodstuffs for its population. The November 30 
lend-lease agreement offers hope in this respect by 
the attention now given to Britain's export trade, 
the importation of large quantities of foodstuffs, and 
a reconversion program geared to our own. 


AID TO COOPERATION. The most important 


— Page Two 


aspect of this agreement is the recognition that Amer- 
ican interests will be served by a strong and stable 
Britain. The serious differences which exist between 
the two countries were demonstrated at the Chicago 
Aviation Conference. The text of the present agree- 
ment, however, suggests a very careful appraisal 
of the situation, and reveals a spirit of cooperation 
which will be needed in approaching such questions 
as the reduction of tariffs, imperial preferences, the 
abolition of other restrictive trade mechanisms, and 
the extension of further public or private credits for 
Britain. If the British want private loans, this would 
necessitate the repeal of the Johnson Act. A recom- 
mendation to this effect was also made to Congress 
by the Administration on November 30. Such devel- 
opments, along with the expected Congressional ap- 
proval of the lend-lease agreement, should afford 
official British circles ground for belief that this gov- 
ernment would not willingly jeopardize Britain's 


future economic position. GRANT S. MCCLELLAN 


TRANSITION TO MODERN ECONOMY PERTURBS LATIN AMERICANS 


In the past five years, the emergence of Latin 
American countries as an important source of critical 
materials needed for war production has caused far- 
reaching changes in their economies. Characteristic 
of wartime changes have been concentration on the 
production of strategic materials; a shift in the direc- 
tion of trade toward the United States, as one by one 
the pre-war markets of Latin America in Europe and 
Asia were eliminated; and economic diversification 
enforced by inability to import foodstuffs and manu- 
factured goods. Now, with peace in sight, and the 
imminent possibility of retrenchment in United States 
spending, the people of Latin America are appraising 
their post-war position with some uneasiness. Before 
the war they were on the borderline between a co- 
lonial economy and a modern diversified economy. 
Now they wonder whether the difficult transition can 
be made without serious political and social con- 
sequences. 

TREND TOWARD INDUSTRIALIZATION. 
The war period has altered economic and social con- 
ditions. The balance between agricultural, minerai 
and industrial production has shifted perceptibly. 
Production levels have risen sharply, even spectacu- 
larly. Agriculture has been marked by increased culti- 
vation of those items in which the given country was 
deficient and intensive production of raw materials 
no longer obtainable from the Far East. In mining, 
too, a marked expansion in both volume and nature 
of output has taken place. Latin American production 
of mercury has risen from 5 to 10 per cent of the 
world total; tungsten, from 10 to 20 per cent; and 
antimony from 50 to 75 per cent, being now equiv- 
alent to the total pre-war world production. Of all 
these developments, however, the trend toward in- 
dustrialization has been most significant. A number 


of countries, notably Argentina, found themselves 
able not only to meet domestic demand for manu- 
factured items, but to export to neighboring coun- 
tries. On the average, Latin American industrial pro- 
duction has risen between 15 and 20 per cent. 

Thanks to price rises and wage increases, indi- 
vidual incomes have attained new high levels. In 
terms of real income, however, these increases have 
been nullified by the rising cost of living. Inflation- 
ary conditions, occasioned by shortages of goods and 
by large increases in the volume of consumer purchas- 
ing power represented by bank deposits and currency, 
and aggravated by speculation, are present in most 
Latin American countries. In Chile, where inflation 
is at present at its worst, the cost of living index has 
risen 100 per cent since 1939. In order to curb the 
rise in prices, every country has adopted either price 
controls, including rents, or rationing measures—and 
some have attempted both. In addition, governments 
have initiated fiscal and monetary measures, even to 
the extent of restricting the purchase of foreign ex- 
change. Despite these severe anti-inflationary meas- 
ures, prices have continued to rise, primarily as a 
result of ineffective administration of the controls, 
but also because the economic structure of most 
Latin American countries is such that a policy of 
price ceilings is difficult to maintain. 

CREDITS ABROAD. Although Latin America 
will emerge from the war burdened by inflation diff- 
culties, it has one important asset in the possession 
of large dollar and sterling credits abroad which may 
prove a stabilizing factor during the transition period. 
As a result of an exceptionally favorable balance 
of trade, it has accumulated over the five-year peri- 
od 1939-44 close to $4,000,000,000 in gold and for- 
eign exchange (chiefly dollars)—a sum representing 


a 300 pe 
to our | 
shortage 
isphere | 
the Lat 
ain, ham 
by lend- 
less abli 
States 1 
almost 
ports in 
cent. TI 
change | 
price in 
measure 
1941. W 
whetl 
on the p 
adjustm 
siderabl 
firms. 
There 
Americz 
zil, Col 
part of 
grams ¢ 
During 
place o! 
chase tl 
expansi 
the moc 
tion sys 
traffic it 
has lon; 
Mexico 
these p 


Just 
T 


Tells 
1784 
eleme 
Goetz 
illust 
Calde 
study 


Delia 
the fir 


For 


FOREIGN 
Headquart 
second-cla: 
ne month 


ee 


[- 


: 
: 


Pins 


eT nee et aes 


BE Sern 


SP om alte Eat MOAR eta al 


a 300 per cent increase over its 1939 holdings. Owing 
to our concentration on war production and the 
shortage of merchant vessels available for hem- 
isphere trade, this country has been unable to meet 
the Latin American demand for commodities. Brit- 
ain, hampered by supply and shipping shortages and 
by lend-lease restrictions on exports, has been even 
less able to sell to Latin America. While United 
States imports from Latin America have increased 
almost 116 per cent since 1938, therefore, its ex- 
ports in this same period show a rise of only 49 per 
cent. The phenomenal accumulation of foreign ex- 
change has been considerably affected since 1941 by 
price increases, for the actual volume of our imports, 
measured in pre-war prices, has not exceeded that of 
1941. Where and how these credits are to be spent 

whether on repatriation of foreign investments, 
on the purchase of industrial equipment, or on the re- 
adjustment of outstanding debts—is a matter of con- 
siderable interest to American and British business 
firms. e 


There are indications that a number of Latin 
American countries—Mexico, Chile, Argentina, Bra- 
zil, Colombia and Venezuela—may invest at least 
part of this newly acquired purchasing power in pro- 
grams of industrial rehabilitation and development. 
During the war, they have neither been able to re- 
place old, outmoded factory machinery nor to pur- 
chase the necessary heavy equipment for industrial 
expansion. Nor have they been able to proceed with 
the modernization and extension of their transporta- 
tion systems to the extent necessary to permit a rapid 
trafic in commodities. Industrial planning, however, 
has long been underway; and some countries, notably 
Mexico and Brazil, are already actively embarked on 
these programs, while others are only awaiting the 


Page Three 


Just published... 


THE DRAGON AND THE EAGLE 
40¢ 


Tells the story of Chinese-American relations from 
1784 to the present. It is written especially for upper 
elementary and junior high school students by Delia 
Goetz, well-known author of books for young readers; 
illustrated by Thomas Handforth, winner of the 
Caldecott medal and a Guggenheim Fellowship for 
study in the Far East. 


Delia Goetz is also author of “Teamwork in the Americas,” 
the first FPA book for young readers. 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th St., New York 16 


end of the war to obtain access to United States and 
British sources of supply. But it is speculative just 
how long these funds will last. The accumulated de- 
mand of devastated European countries for food- 
stuffs and raw materials may serve to create addi- 
tional Latin American credits abroad. At the same 
time, however, it is expected that the demand for 
critical materials will drop sharply at the end of the 
war. The United States has already withdrawn cer- 
tain of its Latin American contracts. Moreover, there 
will again be available Far Eastern sources of such 
materials as rubber, quinine and mica now produced 
in this hemisphere at a higher cost. Sooner or later, 
therefore, Latin American countries will have to face 
the problem of how to pay for their programs of 
industrialization. 


The solution of this stubborn problem of the dis- 
posal of raw materials, the orderly development of 
industries without resort to uneconomic tariff or 
subsidy protection, continued economic aid from the 
United States and extension of favorable credit terms, 
the conclusion of commercial agreements to facilitate 
economic interchange—all these are questions on 
which joint action at a future inter-American con- 
ference is necessary. 

O.LivE HOLMES 


(This 7s the third im a seévies of articles on post war Latin America.) 


The Foreign Policy Association does not publish 
an annual report with financial statements, due to the 
cost of such publication and to the paper shortage. 
However, if members are interested and wish to have 
details in regard to our activities and finances, we 
shall be glad to furnish them if they will call at the 
office or write to us. 


Escape from Java, by Cornelius van der Grift and E. H. 
Lansing. New York, Crowell, 1943. $2.00 
A brief account of Japanese rule in occupied Java, to- 
gether with the story of the manner in which three Dutch- 
men escaped from the island in a 25-foot fishing boat, mak- 
ing their way across three thousand miles of the Indian 
Ocean. 


A History of Russia, by George Vernadsky. New Haven, 
Yale University Press, 1944. $2.75 
Rewritten, with much new material added to show 

changes in attitude since the original text appeared fifteen 

years ago. 

Meet Your Congress, by John T. 
Doubleday, Doran, 1944. $2.00 
Describes rather favorably and interestingly the work 

of Congress and in the chapter, “What’s Wrong With 

Congress?” brings out the author’s ideas on relations with 

the Executive. 


Flynn. Garden City, 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXIV, No. 8, 


ne month for change of address on membership publications. 


DECEMBER 8, 1944. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York 16, N. Y. Frank Ross McCoy, President; DorotHy F. Lggt, Secretary; 


second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. 


Incorporated. National 
Vera MicHeres Dean, Editor. Entered as 
Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at lease 


F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year 


181 


Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labe- 


* 
4 
e 
‘ 
: 
ri 


oe Se 


Washington News Letter 


STATE DEPARTMENT SHAKE-UP OFFERS OPPORTUNITY FOR REFORMS 


Now that the United States has assumed in world 
affairs a role commensurate with its vast industrial 
and military power, it needs adequate machinery for 
the conduct of its vastly expanded international re- 
lations. In the past, the State Department had often 
functioned well in the achievement of the limited 
foreign policy objectives sought by this country. But, 
as it was functioning before the outbreak of war in 
1939, the Department reflected primarily the rela- 
tively narrow needs of a predominantly isolationist 
country. Effective participation by the United States 
in an international organization that could really 
promise security to all nations will require far-reach- 
ing reforms in our system of conducting foreign 
affairs. 

CHANGES NEEDED. The opportunity for re- 
forms comes with the advancement of Edward R. 
Stettinius, Jr., to the post of Secretary of State as 
successor to Cordell Hull. Stettinius is not expected 
to initiate much policy. On major lines he may be 
content to follow the lead of President Roosevelt 
and intimate White House advisers; on minor lines 
he may accept the advice of the Foreign Service 
whose task, in the Department and in the diplomatic 
and consular missions abroad, is to deal with the 
technical details of day-to-day political matters. In 
the field of organization, however, Stettinius, an 
efficient businessman, could take a number of bold 
steps. During the past year he already has consid- 
erably improved the public relations of the Depart- 
ment. On December 4 the President announced a 
sweeping reorganization intended to strengthen the 
Department for its war and postwar tasks, with the 
removal of Adolf Berle, Jr., Breckinridge Long and 
G. Howland Shaw, and the appointment of Joseph 
C. Grew to the post of Under Secretary, vacated by 
Mr. Stettinius, and of William L. Clayton, Nelson 
A. Rockefeller and Archibald MacLeish to Assistant 
Secretaryships. 


The first need in the Department is harmonious in- 
tegration of its various offices. Today they sometimes 
conflict with each other, and the Department has no 
effective arrangement for reaching rapid decisions 
at the top, as is done by a military general staff, or 
for forcing subordinates to accept such decisions. Al- 
though the partial reorganization of the Department 
last January 15 was designed, among other things, 
to relieve the Assistant Secretaries of detailed work 


FOR VICTORY ° 


BUY UNITED STATES WAR BONDS 


so that they might form part of a group of high 
policy-makers, the Department often seeks to arrive 
at decisions through a long series of consultations 
among high and subordinate officers who repeat 
familiar arguments. 


A second essential need is reform of the Foreign 
Service. Its officers will need training in the require- 
ments of a diplomacy suited to the prospective 
changed position of the United States, which will 
want energetic and well-informed agents actively 
advancing the interests of their country abroad. 
Members of the Foreign Service will better under- 
stand those interests if they are given an opportunity 
to meet nren and women from all walks of life all 
over the United States. To make the service more 
attractive to a greater number of young men, the 
Department should further increase the pay level of 
its officers. In one instance, at least, a career man 
was drawing $5,000 annually after 17 years of ex- 
perience. The salary of Ambassadors has for long 
been $17,500; to that now is added $3,000 in allow- 
ances—allotted to all Ambassadors, whether they 
serve in Panama or Britain. Yet only a man of large 
independent means could hold the expensive post of 
Ambassador in London. 


ECONOMIC FOREIGN POLICY. A third need 
of the State Department is strengthening of its eco- 
nomic divisions. Past attempts to place administra- 
tion of economic affairs in the Department have 
worked out unfortunately, especially in the case of 
export control, economic warfare, and foreign relief, 
but formulation of policy in economic affairs remains 
there. Invariably the political sections of the Depart- 
ment have stifled the initiative of the economic divi- 
sions. This experience suggests that a strong eco- 
nomic foreign policy may be developed more effec- 
tively outside the State Department, and considera- 
tion is being given in Washington to the possibility 
of turning over the long-term functions of the For- 
eign Economic Administration to the Department of 
Commerce. The United States needs a resourceful and 
active economic administration that will contribute to 
prosperity at home and stability abroad. The days are 
gone when United States commercial representatives 
abroad could perform the functions expected of them 
merely by gathering market statistics. 


BLairR BOLLES 


1918- 


| T wo 


cent 
wars sh 
civil str 


concern 


ranged 
dash thi 
W het 
tion of 
pected t 
nouncec 
tions in 
lems of 
influenc 
one of | 
his wor 
good th 
future 
cern nol 
liberato 


W H¢ 
discussi 
howeve 
and ed 
agree O 
“comm 
dress t 
offered 
“fight f 
has pro 


but he 


