ae 
sing flow 
t similar 
intly and 
eatres of 
d in the 

without 
the Aleu 
an West 


uietly re- 
7 Strategy 
nson was 
the other 
the pres- 
or Prime 
r pleas. 
ngton has 
for Aus- 
F General 
air forces 
n he came 


ar against | 


ision was 
ty leader 
-ft Baatan 
ould head 
mquest of 
to remain 
1 material. 
ear is CON- 
ty, but not 
nese have 
f new ait- 
hing from 
tralia. But 
f air bases 
sive, being 
ul in New 
10t unduly 
n the time 
Japan, it is 


yhether the 
Sut it is an 
concentrate 
to win the 
Vashington 
vardless of 
thing short 
1 its course. 
ELLIOTT 


NDS 


APR 39 1943 
Entered as 2nd class matter 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN | 


¥ 


An interpretation of current international events by the Research Staff of the Foreign Policy Association 
FOREIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. 


Vou. XXII, No. 28 


ApriL 80, 1948 


_ SOVIET-POLISH BREAK COMPELS ALLIES TO CLARIFY WAR AIMS 


he spring campaign of the fourth year of war 
in Europe opened over the Easter week-end. It 


| opened, as so many times in the past, with a Nazi 


offensive—not on the military, but on the psychologi- 
cal battlefront. The efforts of the United States to 
detach Finland from Germany and thus breach 
Hitler's ‘‘fortress of Europe” have not only been de- 
feated but outmatched by Nazi efforts to break the 
United Nations ring around Europe through further- 
ing a conflict between the Soviet Union and the 
Polish government in London. In this first round of 
diplomatic and propaganda warfare the Nazis have 
won an outstanding victory. They have won this 
victory not because either Finland or Poland wants 
to be dominated by Germany but because neither 
feels any assurance that, in case of a United Nations 
victory, their fate would necessarily be better than 
if they submit to Nazi rule. Where Allied diplomacy 
has failed is in providing a concrete and convincing 
alternative to Hitler's ‘new order” in Europe. 

In view of the strict censorship imposed for weeks 
on news about the Soviet-Polish rift it would be 
premature at this moment to try to assess blame 
among the participants in the crisis first revealed to 
the world by Foreign Commissar Molotov’s note of 
April 26 to the Polish Ambassador in Moscow. But 
to understand the situation which now threatens the 
unity of the anti-Axis coalition laboriously formed 
over the past three and a half years by countries vic- 
tims of either German or Japanese aggression, it is 
essential to bear in mind three things. First, the small 
countries of Europe (or for that matter of any other 
continent) have been and continue to be objects, not 
Subjects, of international diplomacy. Lacking suffi- 
cient economic resources and adequate armaments, 
they have no independence in any real sense of the 
word, whatever political fictions may be woven 
around the concept of national sovereignty. So far 
as the countries of Eastern Europe and the Balkans 


are concerned, they have today—as for centuries— 
a cruel choice between subjection either to the Ger- 
mans or to the Russians. As long as there is no other 
alternative, some will lean toward Germany, others 
toward Russia, depending on historical tradition, ge- 
ogtaphical proximity, and the degree of hostility 
felt in the past toward either of their great neigh- 
bors. This does not mean that, if they had a free 
choice, they would not prefer to move in the orbit 
of Britain and the United States. But to put the mat- 
ter quite bluntly, the experience of Finland and Po- 
land—to mention only the countries now in the 
news—has been that the Anglo-Saxon powers do not 
match their professions of sympathy with practical 
aid in time of dire need. This experience, unfor- 
tunate as it may seem at this moment, is definitely 
on the debit side of the Allied ledger. 

CIVIL STRIFE SERVES NAZIS. Second, and 
even more important for the future, the struggle 
now being waged for the allegiance of European 
peoples is not being waged on strictly national lines, 
as between national states, but also on civil war 
lines, as between various groups of the population. 
The Nazis are bidding, as they have since their rise 
to power, for the support of the upper classes— 
diplomats, military men, industrialists, landowners— 
who in Poland and Finland, for example, have been 
traditionally not only anti-Communist but, long be- 
fore 1917—when Finland and part of Poland had 
been included in the Russian Empire—anti-Russian 
as well. The Russians, on the other hand, are bid- 
ding for the support of those elements in every 
neighboring country who might be considered sym- 
pathetic to both Russia and the Soviet system— 
workers, peasants, intellectuals. This inner’ struggle, 
which was already so clearly defined during the 
Spanish civil war, has been consistently underesti- 
mated by British and American statesmen. It now 
emerges with stark nakedness in Poland and Yugo- 


— 


= Page Two 


slavia, and exists in latent form in Finland. Hitler, 
for his part, has always been highly skillful in utiliz- 
ing the twin forces of nationalism and fear of revo- 
lution to divide and confuse his enemies. The extent 
to which he has succeeded in this instance offers 
overwhelming proof that the weapon of propaganda 
has by no means been blunted. 

But the third thing that the British and Ameri- 
cans must realize is that Nazi propaganda alone 
could never have done the trick, either in the case of 
Finland or Poland. True, some of the*men who claim 


to speak for the Finnish and Polish peoples may feel ° 


that they have more to lose personally, or as a group, 
by a Russian victory than a German defeat, and trim 
their course accordingly. The loss of these men would 
be, on balance, a gain for the Allies. The crisis goes 
deeper than that, however. It would be both unjust 
and untrue to jump to the conclusion that Finland and 
Poland—or even considerable sections of Finns and 
Poles—desire a Nazi victory. To make such an as- 
sumption in the case of Poland, invaded in 1939 by 
both German and Russian troops, its leaders scattered, 
its intellectuals decimated, its workers and peasants 
subjected to forced labor for the German conquerors, 
would be a gross perversion of the existing situation. 


el 
—— 


What we must remember is that in the last analysis 
many Finns and Poles are swayed by uncertainty as 
to just what Britain and the United States propose 
to do about Europe in case of victory—whether they 
intend to give Russia a free hand in the region from 
the Baltic to the Black Sea, or plan to throw their 
full political, military and economic weight into the 
task of effecting a reconstruction of Europe on lines 
that would afford at least a minimum degree of 
security to the small nations. No one expects precise 
blueprints. But neither can Hitler's new propaganda 
of promising the conquered peoples security and pros. 
perity under the aegis of the German “master race” 
be effectively met by continued hesitation on the part 


of Britain, and especially the United States, concern. | 


ing the responsibilities they are ready to assume for 
the post-war reconstruction of Europe. If the Allies 


can seize the occasion created by the Soviet-Polish | 


break to clarify their own aims in Europe, they will 
be in a better position to rally to their side those ele- 
ments in Europe who want neither Nazism nor the 
Soviet system, but are left floundering by lack of 
leadership from the Western democracies. 


VERA MICHELES DEAN 


MEXICO’S ECONOMY CHANGING GREATLY UNDER WAR CONDITIONS 


By ERNEST S. HEDIGER 
Mr. Hediger bas just returned from a month's stay in Mexico, 
where he delivered a series of lectures at the National University 
on international economic relations in wartime. 

The historic meeting on April 20 of Presidents 
Franklin D. Roosevelt and Manuel Avila Camacho 
in Monterey, Mexico, and their joint visit the fol- 
lowing day to Corpus Christi, Texas, gave added 
emphasis to the close collaboration that characterizes 
the relations of the two countries during this war. 
The speeches of both heads of state reflected the 
profound desire of their nations to remain strongly 
united and do all in their power to win the war 
against the Axis. 


A FULL-FLEDGED ALLY. In relation to its 
wealth and population, Mexico’s contribution to the 
war effort of the United Nations is far from neg- 
ligible although, being essentially non-military, it 
can hardly be spectacular. Mexico’s principal role in 


EAST AND WEST OF SUEZ 
25¢ 


The latest Headline Book, which tells the story of the Modern 
Near East—Egypt, Turkey, Syria, Palestine, Arabia, Iraq and 
Iran—and its strategic importance to both the Axis and 
the United Nations. 


Order from 
Foreign Policy Association, 22 East 38th Street, New York 


the war is as a producer of strategic minerals. In 
response to the war needs of the United Nations— 
principally the United States—it has developed its 
output of copper, zinc, lead, mercury, tungsten, anti- 
mony and other urgently necessary minerals. For 
some of these, its exports have increased up to 50 per 
cent. But this is only the more obvious part of Mexi- 
co’s war collaboration. Even if Mexico had remained 
neutral, it would undoubtedly have increased its pro- 
duction of minerals and shipped them to us. At the 
same time, however, it would most probably have 
been in a position to dictate the prices of these 
products and, moreover, would have requested in 
exchange definite quantities of other goods and raw 
materials. Instead, being a full-fledged ally, Mexico 
places these products at the disposal of the democ- 
racies, accepting the prices the latter established, 


without asking in exchange the machinery and other | 


manufactured goods it badly needs for maintenance 
of its own economic life. During 1942 exports to the 
United States surpassed imports from this country by 
$50,000,000. 

As it happens, this increase in exports of minerals 
and other Mexican goods, such as agricultural prod- 
ucts, cotton cloth, shoes and straw hats, is accom 
panied by a drastically reduced importation of for 
eign goods. Its foreign trade practically cut off by 
war and lack of transportation, Mexico must rely 
solely on the United States, which finds itself um 
able to provide what Mexico needs most—tractots, 


Le, 
LL 


analysis 
tainty as 
Propose 
her they 
on from 
ow their 
into the 
on lines 


egree of ; 


S precise 
paganda 
ind pros- 
ter race” 
the part 
concern- 
sume for 
1e Allies 
et-Polish 
they will 
hose ele- 
nor the 
lack of 


DEAN 


ONS 


erals. In 
lations— 
loped its 
fen, anti- 
tals. For 
to 50 per 
of Mexi- 
remained 
d its pro- 
s. At the 
bly have 
of these 
1ested in 
and raw 
, Mexico 
e democ- 
rablished, 
ind other 
intenance 
rts to the 
ountry by 


minerals 
ral prod- 
is accom- 
n of for 
ut off by 
must rely 
itself un- 
—tractofs, 


Ts 
— 


trucks, electrical appliances, machine parts, chemi- 
cals, etc. According to declarations made on April 
6, 1943 by Eduardo Villasefior, director of Mexico's 
bank of issue, the finished products made in the 
United States from copper, zinc and lead—which 
Mexico needs and cannot obtain—represent only 2 
per cent of Mexican exports of such minerals. 


As a consequence of this primarily one-way trade, 
Mexico’s economy is undergoing significant changes. 
While the position of the wage-earners is being im- 
paired by the increase in the cost of living, that of 
businessmen and landowners is being improved by the 
wartime boom. Falling-off of imports due to Ameri- 


) can government control over exports from the United 


States and abundance of idle money have created 
strong incentives to Mexican production and given 
tise to a boom in farming, mining and industry. In 
1942 alone over one hundred important new indus- 
trial corporations, with initial capital investments 
totaling some $11,000,000, were registered—not in- 
duding 124 new mining properties opened during 
the first nine months of the same year. Industrial 
shares have soared to unprecedented heights. 


MONETARY CONSEQUENCES. The obvious 
result of the impossibility of importing goods in an 
amount even distantly approaching the quantities 
exported from Mexico is that the country is increas- 
ingly acquiring credits in American dollars or their 


Page T bree 


equivalent in Mexican pesos. Owing to this influx of 
capital Mexico’s currency circulation increased in 
1942 by over 250 million—or more than 10 per 
cent of its 1929 national income, officially estimated 
at 2,402 million pesos—and has continued to rise 
steadily ever since. Moreover, this already high flood 
is swelled by the millions of dollars constantly be- 
ing sent to Mexico by United States corporations 
and individuals seeking either to obtain higher 
returns or escape from war taxation. As there is 
scant possibility of using this capital for creative 
investment, because of the lack of necessary ma- 
chinery, most of it remains idle or is used to buy 
up existing Mexican property and goods. Such trans- 
fers of property may give rise to resentment among 
the Mexicans and create future political problems. 

The considerable increase in available currency and 
decrease in imported goods have inevitably led to a 
substantial rise in prices. With unrestricted compe- 
tition among buyers in the absence of any rationing 
system, prices have increased proportionately more 
than in the United States, in spite of various govern- 
ment efforts to establish price ceilings. Food index 
prices, for instance, rose from 149 (1929100) in 
January 1942 to 175 in December of the same year. 
The constant rise in prices, besides breeding social 
unrest, brings with it great financial difficulties for 
the government and might compel reduction of its 
program of public works and services. 


VICTORIES IN TUNISIA INCREASE NEED FOR FRENCH UNITY 


Fourteen weeks have passed since General Giraud 
and General de Gaulle met at Casablanca, announced 
their agreement on fundamental principles, and 
promised to work out plans for effecting a complete 
union. In the ensuing period the gap between the 
two French groups has been narrowed, but efforts to 
close it completely have suffered so many disappoint- 
ments that some observers in Washington and Lon- 
don now believe its attainment more remote than 
ever. At the same time, the need for speedy rap- 
prochement becomes more pressing as extremely 
heavy fighting on the tip of Tunisia heralds the end 
of that crucial campaign. 

In the North African theatre of war the soldiers 
of de Gaulle and Giraud ignore their differences and 
are giving an excellent account of themselves as they 
fight side by side and in close cooperation with the 
British and Americans. This harmony is in sharp 
contrast to the conflicting loyalties that have existed 
in the French Navy. A number of sailors have de- 
setted Giraud’s ships, which are under repair in the 
United States, to enlist in de Gaulle’s fleet, and 
others, it is reported, have been detained by Fighting 
French authorities in Scotland because they wanted 
f0 sign up with Giraud. So confused did the situa- 
tion become that the United States intervened on 


April 23 and took the transfer procedure out of the 
hands of the ship commanders and their leaders, 
entrusting it to a board on which there are repre- 
sentatives not only of Giraud and de Gaulle but also 
of the U.S. Navy. 

SERIOUSNESS OF DISUNITY. As the possibil- 
ity of invading Europe draws closer it becomes evi- 
dent that French disunity may cause a serious situa- 
tion at the moment when the United Nations will 
need close cooperation between French and Allied 
armies in North Africa and the underground move- 
ment in France. Close two-way contacts have been 
maintained since 1940 between de Gaulle and the 
organizations of resistance on French soil, and al- 
though the underground press lauds Giraud as a 
gallant and able military hero, it continues to con- 
sider de Gaulle its leader. If the underground fol- 
lows one general until the hour of invasion, while 
the bulk of the French Army in North Africa follows 
another, the stage might be set, at best, for the loss 
to the United Nations of concerted French action 
against the Axis; and, at worst, for civil war in 
France. Frenchmen who have recently escaped to 
Britain and the United States warn that revolution 
may become endemic in France—as it did in Spain 
after the Napoleonic occupation—if the war-intensi- 


== Page Four 


oe 
ee, 


fied antagonisms between groups are not held in _—‘France. So far as the Army is concerned, Giraud and 
check by the existence of a widely recognized and his advisers—mostly military men—have indicated 
unified source of authority. that they believe France’s collapse in 1940 was due 
LEADERS DIFFER OVER PERSONNEL. Dur- to politicians rather than soldiers, and conclude that 
ing the first weeks of the deadlock it was not certain the military must have a hand in the making of 
what factors were preventing successful fusion. the new France. De Gaulle’s underground organiza. 
When, however, General Catroux, de Gaulle’s special tions—made up chiefly of civilians—are for the most 
representative, brought Giraud’s proposals for unity part Leftist groups who fear that the Army might 
to London on April 11, it was clear that more than be used against them. Different attitudes toward the 
Catroux’s diplomacy was needed to bring the two empire are equally marked. Giraud’s use of im. 
groups together. A comparison of Giraud’s sugges- _ perial officials in his proposed council apparently 
tions with the countersuggestions of de Gaulle on rests on the assumption that the traditionally close 
April 21 reveals that there are now two main points § bonds between metropolitan France and the empire 

- of divergence between the French leaders. First there will continue unchanged. De Gaulle, on the other 
is the matter of the former collaborationists who hand, has been working out a system of decentraliza- | Vou. 
continue to hold important North African adminis- tion in the approximately one-third of the empire| ~ 
trative posts. Despite a number of political house- which acknowledges his control. This little-publicized 


he 
~ 

a 

a 


90 et A a RE ee 
_¢& 


cere 


cleanings, Giraud still retains several men whom the change in the Free French empire is due partly to 
Fighting French refuse to accept into any organiza- the necessities of war, and partly to de Gaulle’s con- S- 
tion in which they would participate. Giraud defends viction that the empire must become increasingly | 
the retention of these administrators in the name independent. brea! 
of efficiency, and maintains that they are doing dif- Should deadlock between Giraud’s and de Gaulle’ | “™ 
ficult and essential jobs in this period of military views persist, it seems impossible that the Allies will | ° : 
crisis. Since only a handful of officials are involved be able to stand aside, regardless of their desire to - 
in the controversy, this point should not present in- interfere as little as possible in the affairs of a orde 
superable difficulties. friendly nation. Both Britain and the United States} “** 

DISAGREE ON TRANSITION PERIOD. The will have to take a hand in speeding the union not ultin 
other, more serious reason, for divergence arises in only because of military necessity, but because pet 
connection with the two generals’ plans for the pro- they have helped to build up the two competing os 
visional organization they want to establish to rep- | movements. Ww NH =? 
resent France among the United Nations—to which INIFRED N. FLADSEL @& the : 
it does not now belong—and to govern France dur- thus 
ing the transition period that will follow the end of Round Trip to Russia, by Walter Graebner. New York,| ™ ' 
hostilities and precede the restoration of the Repub- Lippincott, 1943. $3.00 as v 


In this small, unpretentious book a correspondent of} the 


lic. Giraud wants a council made up of colonial Time, Life and Fortune has given an unusually balanced, 


governors and commissions, working in close con- vivid and understanding picture of the Russian people and with 
tact with the Army, to speak for France, while de their attitude toward the war, the Soviet government, and| '"1§, 
Gaulle insists on an organization that will give rep- a a a 
resentation to the underground and be superior to We Can Win This War, by Col. W. F. Kernan. Boston, utu 
all military and imperial authorities. During the Littl, Beown, 2088. $1.50 plait 


The author of Defense Will Not Win The War argues! sian: 
for an offensive strategy, involving early invasion of the 


transition period the Giraud plan would presumably 


spell a period of military control until after the re- European continent in decisive fashion. 
° ye ° ° uSs 
patriation of French workers and petsoners now im The Mountains Wait, by Theodor Broch. Saint Paul, Webb) 4. 
Germany, while de Gaulle’s would provide for Book Publishing Co., 1942. $3.00 b 
civilian government after the first emergencies are They Came as Friends, by Tor Myklebost. New York) 0° 
past and before elections are held. a, Ser, See Ps 


The Fight of the Norwegian Church against Nazism, by R 


There is no casy possibility of merging these pro- Bjarne Hiéye and Trygve M. Ager. New York, Macmil} 4}). 


posais, for they are based not only on the different lan, 1943. $1.75 Pol; 
interests of the groups represented, but on different Both vivid and factual, these books describe Norwegias a 
conceptio . Sate ae resistance to the Nazis. Mr. Broch, who was Mayor of} SU‘v 
th v/a se the role two ape rtant institutions— Narvik, also includes a first-hand account of the Germal) cow 

e army and the empire—will play in post-war invasion. ee 


FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XXII, No. 28, Aprit 30, 1943. Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. Nation in tl 
Headquarters, 22 East 38th Street, New York, N. Y. FRANK Ross McCoy, President; Dorotuy F. Leet, Secretary; VERA MicHELES Dean, Editor. Entered # to t 
second-class matter December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Three Dollars a Year. Please allow at leat d 

one month for change of address on membership publications. @ 


ern 
F. P. A. Membership (which includes the Bulletin), Five Dollars a Year > . 
ae : Produced under union conditions and composed and printed by union labor. a 


