



1tory 
re is 
Trade 
‘icul- 
free 








EOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN 


An inter pretation, of current international events by the Research Staff 


MEAN BRARYSebscription, Two Dollars a Year 


, OF MIGMIGN POLICY ASSOCIATION, Incorporated 
8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. 





lings\¥or. XVII, No. 29 


May 13, 1938 





LC 


‘ain’s 


> his 
> has 
nent, 
Dring 
JL ster 
f the 


t ap- 


THE WAR IN SPAIN 


by Charles A. Thomson 


A review of the military conflict in Spain, which 
includes a discussion of the political forces that 
have influenced the contest on both sides. 


May 1 issue of Foreign Policy Reports 


25 cents a copy 





2, 1921, at the Post 
Office at New York, 
N. Y., umder the act 
of March 3, 1879. 











General Library 
University of Michigan 


Ann Arbor, Mich. 











alera 


lyde, 


STRONGER FRANCE BOLSTERS ANGLO-FRENCH AXIS 





al of 
con- 


that 
pidly 
ge of 
Ad 
>, the 
udget 
),000. 
nated 
to be 
-nitaty 
year. 
t pro 
25 0 
diate 
ed on 


. His 
curope 


oshi S. 
_ 19387. 


’s con- 
e 16th 
d of a 
terials, 
panese, 
anding 
ne will 
s since 





National 
ss mattet 





D ESPITE repeated and emphatic affirmation of 
the immutable friendship between their two 
peoples, proclaimed at a state banquet in Rome on 
May 7, Hitler’s conversations with Mussolini have 
mded with no clear indication that the Rome-Berlin 
wis has been strengthened. Italo-German tension 
geated by the abrupt consummation of Anschluss in 
March has apparently been assuaged for the present 
by Hitler's pledge ‘‘to consider inviolable for all time 
the frontiers of the Alps erected between us by na- 
ure.” His promise did not prevent Mussolini from 
apressing the hope that Germany and Italy would 
sek, “together with others,” a more equitable in- 
national order. This phrase was regarded as a hint 
that Mussolini would continue to cultivate the 
friendship of Britain and France. In Britain Prime 
Minister Chamberlain had meanwhile strengthened 
the position of the Italian dictator by securing ratifi- 
ation of the Anglo-Italian treaty in the House of 
Commons on May 2, while Hitler was on his way to 
Rome. 


The round of state functions and the grandiose 
display of military power staged by Mussolini on 
May 3-9 left unanswered the question to what ex- 
tnt Britain has succeeded in drawing Italy out of 
the German orbit. By contrast, the Anglo-French 
nversations of April 28-29 had resulted in an 
tpenly proclaimed military alliance. The strength of 
the Anglo-French combination, moreover, may be 
wnsiderably enhanced by the decisive economic and 
inancial measures adopted by the new government 
if Premier Daladier. After obtaining, on April 13, 
ilmost unanimous parliamentary approval of his de- 
mand for power to govern by decree until July 31, 
Daladier immediately undertook to end serious 
ttikes in the aviation, motors and metallurgical in- 
dustries of the Paris region—industries vital to na- 





tional defense. By April 19 work had been resumed, 
and both sides had agreed to submit the issues at 
stake to arbitration. 
Meanwhile, M. Daladier’s cabinet was elaborating 
a comprehensive plan for national economic regen- 
eration, whose completion was hastened by a precipi- 
tate fall of the franc. On April 25 the government 
revealed the outlines of a new program for increas- 
ing the production of French industries, balancing 
the budget, and inducing expatriated or hoarded 
capital to return to circulation in France with reason- 
able expectation of profitable utilization and a stable 
monetary unit. The objectives of the plan, were 
stated to be: financial rehabilitation; modernization 
of equipment in French factories; some adjustment 
of the labor situation to secure greater output; a 
slum-clearance program to benefit labor; improve- 
ment of credit facilities for commerce and industry; 
fuller exploitation of colonial resources; and en- 
couragement of the tourist traffic. The first series of 
decrees intended to achieve these goals, published 
on May 3, was headed by a flat 8 per cent increase 
in all state taxes, direct and indirect. A clearing- 
house fund to discount the bills of national defense 
contractors was established to obviate former difficul- 
ties in obtaining capital; but a surtax was simultane- 
ously imposed on the profits of such enterprises. Tax 
remissions were granted to companies expanding 
and modernizing their plant. French national 
budgetary accounting was simplified. Tourists were 
granted reduced railroad fares and a lower price for 
gasoline. The government intimated that it would 
raise customs tariffs to decrease the unfavorable 
merchandise trade balance, and attempt to increase 
production—without openly abrogating the 40-hour- 
week law—by permitting overtime work under vari- 
ous pretexts. New appropriations were decreed to 
increase the personnel of the army, navy and air 

















force, with the bulk of the funds devoted to strength- 
ening French aviation. 


These measures were climaxed on May 4 by a 
sudden and devaluation of the franc—the 
third since September 1936—and the establishment 
of a new minimum parity of 179 francs to the pound 
—e or 35.8 francs to the dollar. This new “re- 

’ of the franc—reluctantly accepted by Wash- 
inaee and London as the only alternative to ex- 
change control—was immediately followed by a 
wave of repatriation and dishoarding of capital. It 
has thus become possible for the government to 
issue an immediate short-term loan and, if condi- 
tions continue favorable, a large national defense 
loan at far lower interest rates than those which have 
hitherto saddled the French treasury with an im- 
possible fiscal burden. Revaluation of the gold stock 
of the Bank of France at the new parity will pro- 
vide a handsome profit which will more than repay 
the inflationary advances made by the Bank to the 
government. If prices in France can be held down by 
governmental controls, French industry may obtain 
an exceedingly favorable position on world markets. 


In seeking nation-wide support for these bold 
steps—many of which are attributed to Paul Rey- 
naud, financial authority and Minister of Justice in 
the present cabinet — Premier Daladier has con- 
sistently appealed to French patriotism. Continuance 
of the economic and financial anemia from which 
France has suffered for years, which would be seri- 
ous enough under ordinary circumstances, is fraught 
with peril in the existing international crisis. France 
can minimize the handicap of a relatively small, sta- 
tionary population only by adopting a concept long 
preached by Hitler—that a nation’s economic power 
and wealth depend on the volume of its industrial 
and military production. Léon Blum, Daladier’s pre- 
decessor, proposed to stimulate production by meas- 
ures of constraint, such as a capital levy and modified 
exchange control, which would tend to force the 
capitalist interests of France to bear the larger share 
of the recovery burden. The Daladier government, 
while adopting a number of the Blum proposals, 
has framed its decrees with a view to restoring the 
confidence of French capitalists and thus coaxing 
them to invest their funds in French productive en- 
terprise. Daladier, moreover, is attempting to per- 
suade the parties composing the Popular Front that 
they must make reasonable terms with their domes- 
tic opponents—the business interests of the Right— 
in order to meet Germany’s challenge. If both capi- 
tal and labor respond wholeheartedly to the efforts 
of the government, France may at long last enter 
the buoyant phase of the business cycle. If they do 
not, the respite afforded by the new franc devalua- 
tion will be no more permanent than similar meas- 


Page Two 












ures taken during the past two years. Continuatiog 
of economic difficulties can only result in more drag 
tic subsequent steps narrowing the area of personal 
and economic freedom in a democracy menaced ly 


totalitarian war. Davip H. Popprr 


JAPAN’S DIFFICULTIES MULTIPLY 


After ten months of increasingly serious military 
operations, Japan seems even further removed from 
a decisive settlement of the ‘China incident’ than 
at any previous time. Greatly reinforced Japanes 
armies are once more within striking distance of 
Hsiichow, strategic junction on the Lunghai and 
Tientsin-Pukow railways. The defending Chinese 
troops in Shantung, however, have again harassed 
the invaders’ line of communications, launched 
strong thrusts against the flanks of the advancing 
Japanese divisions, and finally counter-attacked in 
force. For a time these tactics threatened a second 





Japanese military disaster. Front-line detachment| « 


were cut off and annihilated, and a general Japanese 
retreat seemed imminent. Although this has not o¢ 
curred, the immediate pressure on Hsiichow from 
the north has apparently been lifted—a striking re 
sult in view of Japan’s strenuous efforts to vindicate 
its military prestige on this front. Hsiichow is also 
threatened by three Japanese columns moving up 
from the south in Anhwei and Kiangsu provinces, 
Of these, the main central column has still advanced 
but slightly beyond Pengpu on the Tientsin-Pukow 
Railway; a second column is struggling up the coast 
toward Haichow, while a third is striking inland to- 
ward Hofei. 
Equally important Chinese military successes have 
occurred on the northern and western fronts. From 
Honan, Hopei and Shansi provinces the Japanese 
command seems to have drawn the bulk of the rein 
forcements thrown into the renewed offensive against 
Hsiichow. In these provinces, especially in the region 
just north of the Yellow River, the Chinese forces 
have taken the offensive and regained considerable 
districts overrun by Japanese troops since February. 
The threat to Peiping by Chinese guerrilla troops 
Suggests the extent to which the Japanese hold on 
the northern provinces has been weakened. A majot 
campaign will be required to win back the areas 
thus lost—and this sacrifice has yet to be compen 
sated by a Japanese victory on the Hsiichow front. 
Confronted by a grave military situation, Japan 
has recently made several conciliatory overtures and 
adjustments with respect to foreign interests if 
China. Elections to the Municipal Council of the 
International Settlement at Shanghai passed off with- 
out incident in April. The normal line-up of five Brit 
ish, five Chinese, two Americans and two Japanes¢ 
was maintained intact, despite rumors that Japaf 
(Continued on Page 4) 











ation 
drag. 


sonal 
by 
ER 


litary 
from 
than 
anese 
ce of 
i and 
Linese 
‘assed 
nched 
Ncing 
ed in 
econd 
ments 
anese 
Ot OC 
from 
ng fe 
dicate 
s also 
1g Up 


yinces, 
ranced 
>ukow 
> COast 
nd to 


s have 
From 
panese 
e rein- 
gainst 
region 
forces 
lerable 
>ruaty. 
troops 
old on 
major 
' areas 
ympen- 
front. 
Japan 
es and 
sts if 
of the 
t with- 
ve Brit- 
|panese 
Japan 


Washington News Letter 














, 


WASHINGTON BUREAU 
National Press Building 


May 10—President Roosevelt has returned from 
his cruise in southern waters to face a difficult and 
totally unexpected problem of foreign policy, 
brought to a head during his absence by the revival 
of the campaign to lift the embargo on arms ship- 
ments to Spain. One of Mr. Roosevelt’s last acts 
before leaving Washington was his now famous 
press conference statement expressing “sympathetic 
interest’’ in the London-Rome accord—an act which 
was taken to mean that the Administration did 
not propose to reverse its policy on Spain, brand 
“aggressors,” or part company with Britain on 
any major issues of European policy. For the mo- 
ment, at least, American policy seemed to be 
quiescent. 


Eleventh-Hour Campaign. But the Washington 
front did not remain quiescent for long. No sooner 
had Mr. Roosevelt embarked on the cruiser Phila- 
delphia at Charleston, than the State Department 
discovered that the movement to repeal the Spanish 
embargo had gained unexpected strength in Con- 
gress and that the desperate eleventh-hour publicity 
campaign organized by a number of liberal groups 
was gaining rather than losing ground. On May 2 
Senator Nye, one of the original advocates of 
“mandatory” neutrality legislation, introduced a 
resolution calling for immediate repeal of the Act 
of January 8, 1937, and authorizing the President 
to raise the embargo against the Loyalist govern- 
ment, which provides that no arms shall be carried 
on American ships or owned by citizens of the 
United States. A hurried canvass of: the Senate re- 
vealed an apparent majority of the Foreign Rela- 
tions Committee in favor of the resolution, and an 
influential group which is critical of the existing 
policy. Simultaneously, the State Department was 
deluged with letters and telegrams and besieged by 
delegations from Eastern and Mid-West states de- 
manding that the embargo be lifted. Finally, this 
direct campaign was augmented by a series of in- 
direct flank attacks culminating on May 5 in a state- 
ment made public by the National Lawyers Guild 
challenging the right of the Munitions Control 
Board to license munitions shipments to Germany. 
This statement, prepared by the Guild’s Committee 
on International Law after an exchange of letters 
with the State Department, was sent to all members 
of the House and Senate Foreign Relations com- 








mittees and given wide publicity by Drew Pearson 
and Robert S. Allen in their syndicated column, the 
Washington Merry-Go-Round. 


An Unusual Press Conference. It was this final 
flank attack which precipitated an unusual press 
conference at the State Department on May 6, when 
Secretary Hull clashed with Mr. Pearson and coun- 
tered the charge that by issuing arms licenses to 
Germany, the United States was violating the Ver- 
sailles treaty and the separate German-American 
peace treaty of 1921. The committee of the Lawyers 
Guild had based their case on Article 170 of the 
Versailles treaty, which provided that “importation 
into Germany of arms, munitions and war materials 
of every kind shall be strictly prohibited.” In the 
separate treaty of peace with Germany, the United 
States had reserved all “rights and advantages” un- 
der certain sections of the Versailles treaty, includ- 
ing the disarmament provisions of Part V. Prior 
to the passage of the Neutrality Act, moreover, in 
a letter signed by Mr. Hull in September 1933, the- 
State Department had held that the export of mili- 
tary airplanes to Germany would be viewed by 
this government “with grave disapproval.” On the 
strength of these facts, Messrs. Pearson and Allen 
had charged that “certain officials” in the State De- 
partment had actually been guilty of violating trea- 
ties in permitting munitions shipments to flow to 
Germany. 

In reply, Mr. Hull warmly declared that the 
United States had ‘not violated any treaty or any 
law,” and went on to accuse some newspaper and 
radio commentators of “misrepresentation” amount- 
ing to “criminal libel.” He answered the legal argu- 
ment by contending that the German-American 
treaty imposed no obligation on the United States 
to forbid arms shipments, that Article 170 of the 
Versailles treaty did not prohibit the export of arms 
and ammunition to Germany, and that the Neutral- 
ity Act made it mandatory on the Secretary of State 
to grant export licenses if the exports were not con- 
trary to law or treaty. 

But Mr. Hull and his colleagues at the State De- 
partment were concerned less with the legal ques- 
tion than they were with the resort to innuendo to 
discredit the motives of the Department in its 
Spanish policy. They felt, with some justification, 
that pro-Loyalist groups were seeking to brand a 
group of State Department officials as “‘Fascist sym- 
pathizers,” bent on aiding Nazi Germany while de- 

















priving democratic Spain of rights which it was 
entitled to expect from a friendly neutral. It was 
this flank attack, rather than the legal issue of arms 
shipments to Germany, which led Mr. Hull to speak 
out as he did, and to take the unusual step of making 
public the full transcript of the press conference. 
As to the Spanish policy itself, the State Depart- 
ment had taken no final action at the time of Mr. 
Roosevelt's return to Washington on May 9. At the 
request of Senator Pittman, chairman of the Foreign 
Relations Committee, the Department had compiled 
a lengthy statement setting forth the circumstances 
under which the original embargo had been laid 
down, reviewing the effect of the policy to date and 
examining the possible consequences of lifting the 
ban at this time. Contrary to reports published last 
week, there is no indication that the State Depart- 
ment or the Administration will back the Nye reso- 
lution or seek to modify the Neutrality Act at this 
session of Congress. While the President and Mr. 
Hull may share the personal sympathies of those 
who advocate lifting the embargo, there remains an 
attitude of open doubt whether a sudden reversal 
of policy at this moment would advance the inter- 
ests of peace or even accomplish the ends which its 
proponents seek. W. T. STONE 


JAPAN’S DIFFICULTIES MULTIPLY 
(Continued from Page 2) 


would press for increased representation on the 
Council. Even more significant, Anglo-Japanese ne- 
gotiations in Tokyo resulted on May 2 in a settle- 
ment of the delicate issue affecting disposition of 
Chinese customs receipts in Japanese-occupied cities. 
By this agreement the customs proceeds will hence- 
forth be deposited in the Yokohama Specie Bank, but 
Japan has agreed to meet payment of foreign loans 
hypothecated on these revenues. This arrangement 
apparently enables Japan to use the customs surplus, 
which formerly went to China, for its own purposes. 
The Chinese government, in a note to London on 
May 6, refused to be bound by the agreement and 
reserved its full rights and freedom of action. At 





Page Four — 





—— 


Peiping on May 1 the Japanese-sponsored “‘provi- 
sional government of China” announced its com. 
plete devotion to the open door policy in an effort 
to “facilitate foreign investment.” This plea was 
reiterated in Tokyo on May 9 by Foreign Minister 
Hirota, who declared that the new Chinese régimes 
welcomed “investment of foreign capital” and would 
protect foreign economic interests. 


Two days earlier Foreign Minister Hirota, ad- 
dressing a conference of prefectural governors, had 
stated that “no optimistic view of the future is war- 
ranted” and had called on the Japanese people to 
prepare for “possible extreme personal financial 
sacrifices.” On May 5 a series of Imperial ordinances, 
which invoked twelve articles of the National 
Mobilization Act, had placed Japanese industry 
under virtually unlimited state control. Japan’s for- 
eign trade for the first quarter of 1938 showed a 
decline of 128 million yen in exports and 386 mil- 
lion in imports; the merchandise trade deficit, at 
66 million yen, was 257 million below that for the 
first quarter of 1937. This is the first notable de. 
crease in Japanese export trade since 1932. The 
drastic decline in imports suggests the extent to 
which Japan is denying itself materials which it 
greatly needs. Despite the large reduction of the 
passive trade balance, Japan has shipped gold val- 


ued at approximately 150 million yen to the United | 


States since February. Wholesale prices in Japan 
have skyrocketed; living costs are also rapidly in- 
creasing. The cost-of-living index for April 1938, as 
compiled by the cabinet Bureau of Statistics, was 
eight points above July 1937. Before the outbreak 
of war, moreover, the cost of living had been gradu- 
ally increasing for six years. Against this back- 
ground of economic difficulties at home, Japan's 
military problem in China takes on even more 
formidable dimensions. A speedy and decisive vic- 
tory is becoming steadily more imperative if Japan 
is to salvage anything from its military adventure. 


T. A. BIssON 





The F.DP.A. Bookshelf 


Children of the Rising Sun, by Willard Price. New York, 

Reynal & Hitchcock, 1938. $3.00 

The author presents a sympathetic account of the Jap- 
anese people, their problems, and their destiny. His im- 
pressionistic picture is seen through Japanese eyes; it is 
filled out by personal anecdote and adventure, which makes 
for exciting reading but not for balanced judgment. The 
book magnifies Japan’s achievements and possibilities, and 
exaggerates China’s failings. 


China, The Powers and the Washington Conference, by Al- 
bert E. Kane. Shanghai, The Commercial Press, 1937. 
Distributed by Brentano. $1.00 


A carefully documented study of significant phases of 
international cooperation with respect to China. The first 
two chapters give a valuable summary of the origin and 
development of special foreign rights in China. Treat- 
ment of the Four Power and Nine Power Treaties is also 
illuminated by detailed consideration of their historical 
origin and setting. 








FOREIGN POLICY BULLETIN. Vol. XVII, No. 29, May 13, 1938. 


Published weekly by the Foreign Policy Association, Incorporated. 
Headquarters, 8 West 40th Street, New York, N. Y. RaymMonp Lesime Bugit, President; Vera MicHEetes Dean, Editor. 


National 
Entered as second-class matte? 


December 2, 1921, at the Post Office at New York, N. Y., under the Act of March 3, 1879. Two Dollars a Year. 
F. P. A. Membership, Five Dollars a Year 





Ft 


— 
Vol 


FO 
SPE 


